PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Indian major Adani has rebranded its Australian mining business as Bravus Mining and Resources, marking its ten-year anniversary of operations in Australia. Bravus Mining and Resources CEO Mr David Boshoff said now that construction of the Carmichael project was well under way, it was the ideal time to give Adani’s mining business its own Australian brand. “We have made a significant investment in Queensland and we will be here for the long haul employing local people and doing business in Australia,” Boshoff said. “We are proud to be a dedicated Australian company that is part of the North Queensland community. We will continue to stand up and deliver for the good of our community, no matter how courageous it requires us to be, and Bravus, our new name, reflects this intent,” he said. “Bravus is an Australian company. We operate under Australian law and will pay taxes and royalties here.” Boshoff said the new Bravus name will become increasingly well-known as the brand rolls out over the next year in the lead-up to the Carmichael mine becoming operational, and that the business was on track to produce first coal in 2021. “The coal will be sold at index pricing and we will not be engaging in transfer pricing practices, which means that all our taxes and royalties will be paid here in Australia. “We are fortunate that we will be producing coal from 2021, which is when the market is predicted to have recovered from the Covid-19 lockdowns, that recovery is just starting now as the strictest lockdowns in the region and in India are easing. “The project economics are strong because of the quality of our coal, the low strip ratio and the demand we see for quality thermal coal coming from India and Asia into the future as economies there continue to develop at a rapid pace.” Boshoff said Bravus’ coal would be part of the solution as the global energy mix transitioned to a low emissions future. “We have already secured the market for the 10-million tonnes a year of coal produced at the Carmichael mine, which is focused on India and Asia. “India is one of the largest populations in the world and it is growing rapidly. Right now more than 200-million people in India do not have adequate access to electricity and thermal coal imports will continue to rise in order to meet the demand of this growing population with economic ambition. “The Adani Group walks the talk as the world’s number one international solar company and the largest private supplier of thermal electricity in India, demonstrating there will be a demand for both in the energy mix. “There is excellent work being done in India by Adani, especially to increase the use of renewable energy sources such as solar, however, with population growth expected to increase by more than 280-million people over the next 30 years, thermal energy will still be required to meet demand. “Bravus’ high quality thermal coal will be part of the solution.”