Gold miner DRDGold was announced as the Sunday Times Top 100 Company of the Year. This year, 13 of the top 20 places in the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies list were held by companies operating in the mining sector. To qualify for the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies, JSE-listed companies are required to hold a minimum market capitalisation of R5-billion as of August 31, with winners determined by the highest returns for their shareholders over a five-year period, based on a theoretical initial investment of R10 000. For the period from September 1, 2015, to August 31, 2020, DRDGold achieved a yearly compound growth rate of 77.4%. This means that R10 000 invested in 2015 would have delivered R175 651 this year. Harmony Gold Mining Company and Kumba Iron Ore placed second and third respectively. "We are honoured to be awarded second place and be among the top three companies in South Africa; this is testimony to the commitment and hard work of all of Harmony's people, both in South Africa and Papua New Guinea. This is Harmony's seventieth anniversary year. More than any other South African gold mining company, we believe we demonstrate true sustainability – from our enduring history and the product we mine to the way we mine it, taking care to preserve the environment and to support our communities. "I am most grateful for the continued support of Harmony's board, executives and employees, our shareholders, trade unions, regulators and communities,” says Harmony CEO Peter Steenkamp. LEADERSHIP AWARDS The Business Leader of the Year Award acknowledges those who have made a significant contribution to the South African economy and achieved greatness throughout the previous year. It is decided by the CEOs of the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies from the previous year. This year Michael Brown, CEO of Nedbank, received the accolade. Jacko Maree, deputy chairperson of Standard Bank was celebrated with the Lifetime Achiever Award. The award is decided by a high-profile independent panel, recognising an individual that consistently contributes to the South African economy. An honorary award was bestowed for the first time in the history of the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies, with epidemiologist Professor Salim Abdool Karim being recognised for his commitment in guiding South African leadership in the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. BCX INNOVATION AWARD WINNERS The winners of the second BCX Digital Innovation Awards were also streamed as part of the Sunday Times Top 100 Companies Awards event on November 12. The BCX Digital Innovation Awards "honour South African organisations that have taken up the flag to transform their businesses through technological advancements and digital transformation". The winner in the SME category is Bottles App. Checkers Sixty60 was announced as the overall winner in the corporate category. The Sunday Times Top 100 Companies results were compiled by Vestra Advisory and have been evaluated by Deloitte. The results will be published in the newspaper on November 15.