PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has welcomed the appointment of a new state Cabinet in Queensland, following an election, as well as the establishment of a Minister for Hydrogen, recognizing the importance of the new energy source. Re-elected Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said she expected her Ministers to focus squarely on Queensland’s economic recovery and providing the services all Queenslanders - including seniors and those in regional Queensland - need. “Queenslanders expect us to get on with implementing our Economic Recovery Plan,” the Premier said. “They expect the roads, schools and hospitals we need and the jobs that go with building them. It is our job to get on with the job and that’s exactly what we will do.” Mick De Brenni has been appointed as Minister for Energy, Renewables and Hydrogen, while Scott Steward has been appointed as Minister for Resources. The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) said the new state Cabinet was the right mix of industry know-how and regional representation to deliver on the joint initiative for a Queensland resources industry development plan. QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane said mining and gas industry explorers, producers and their suppliers looked forward to continuing to work with the government and its Ministers. “As we enter Queensland’s first four-year term of Parliament, the QRC and our members look forward to getting to work on the preparation and implementation of the Queensland resources industry development plan that Treasurer Cameron Dick and I announced in Mackay last month. “The plan presents the opportunity to develop a blueprint for the industry’s growth in terms of employment, investment and economic activity, not just for the next four years, but for decades to come. “It has the potential to chart the sector’s future growth, just as the Central Queensland Coal Associates Agreement set up the industry’s development in the 1960s." Macfarlane said the government and the QRC know the resources industry, and the efforts of more than 420 000 Queensland men and women who work in it or because of it, is needed now more than ever. “We know the Covid-19 recovery will be tough and we can assure Queenslanders they can count on us to deliver,” he said. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association has also welcomed the new Cabinet. “As a major driver of Queensland’s economy, the oil and gas sector is committed to working with the new government and Ministry to address the many challenges ahead for the state’s economic recovery,” Queensland director Georgy Mayo said. “Our sector has a long and proud history of engaging with the government to grow the industry. “We are also fully committed to partnering with the government on the recovery process and working to implement our comprehensive 20-point plan to help the state grow.  This is more important than ever because of the shared challenges.”