Volunteer nonprofit organisation Women in Mining UK (WIM UK) on November 19 released its biennial 100 Global Inspirational Women in Mining (WIM100) edition, which features a number of South Africa nominees. The WIM100, which was launched by WIM UK in 2013, highlights the wealth of female talent within the global mining industry, celebrates their “above and beyond” contributions to the industry and identifies role models for future generations. The 100 women featured in the 2020 edition were selected in recognition of their inspiring contribution towards a stronger, safer and more sustainable mining industry. This includes making positive and impactful changes, advocacy and a desire to empower others, perseverance in the face of adversity and an ability to find solutions to challenges. Making WIM100’s list of special mentions are Anglo American Platinum (Amplats) CEO Natascha Viljoen, Anglo American Business Improvement Projects head and Women in Mining South Africa (WiMSA) incoming chairperson Petro du Pisani, Gilbarco Mining GM Rumisha Motilal, Harmony Gold Mining FD Boipelo Lekubo, Mosa Green Consulting MD Lehlogonolo Moseri, Moshe Capital CEO Mametja Moshe and Simba Mogodi Mining Incubation Fund CEO Olebogeng Sentsho. WiMSA chairperson and WIM100 2018 alumna Thabile Makgala congratulates these “phenomenal role models” and particularly the South African nominees for being featured in the WIM100. “The WIM100 book continues to inspire and motivate many women around the world, especially women in the mining industry in South Africa. It continues to demonstrate that women are indeed very capable and continue to make a valuable contribution to the mining industry.” Du Pisani adds that WiMSA, as an organisation, is proud of its South African nominees who adhere to the principles of what makes a WIM100 woman. “They are all trailblazers who advocate and empower and they have all persevered in the face of adversity.” WIM UK is dedicated to promoting the employment, retention and advancement of women in the mining sector. The organisation offers a strong international network to progress professional goals and career aspirations and hosts numerous networking, educational and mentoring events to support personal development. Membership is free and everyone is welcome, regardless of gender or location. WIM UK chairperson Carole Cable explains why she is inspired. “We have seen that each WIM100 book we publish inspires more women who work in mining as they see first-hand what others are doing, and [this] gives them food for thought about what they can do to contribute and progress their careers and why this industry is so worthwhile to be part of.” She adds that there is no shortage of professional, capable women in mining around the world, and by showcasing their stories, WIM UK hopes to inspire even more women to enter and progress in the industry so they can contribute to responsible and sustainable mining. “Mining is a critical industry that plays an essential role in the world’s transition to a low-carbon economy and having a truly diverse and inclusive workforce will be vital to make that happen.” WIM UK MD Alex Buck says the WIM100 book is designed to celebrate the contribution that women make to mining across every aspect of the value chain and across all levels of seniority. “Through these amazing stories, we hope to inspire more women to join the industry and demonstrate to a wider group of mining companies, large and small, the value of diversity and inclusion to the long-term success of their business.” She adds that, particularly interesting about this edition of the WIM100, is the increase in the number of women working in sustainability, responsible sourcing, ethics and artisanal and small-scale mining. This, says Buck, is something that is at the top of the agenda for most investors and society at large. “Our hope is that this WIM100 book will go some way to help break the stereotypes about what a miner looks like and will encourage women to pursue a career in mining, while at the same time encouraging mining companies to acknowledge the breadth of the diverse talent pool.” Meanwhile, Du Pisani thanks everyone who nominated their role models and to all who are role models behind the scenes. “Join WiMSA as we start our 2021 theme early by shining a light on our seven South African nominees,” she comments. The WIM100 fourth edition is sponsored by BMO Capital Markets, Boston Consulting Group, IBM and Heidrick & Struggles.