PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The South Australian government will allocate A$37-million to upgrade the Port Bonython jetty as part of its ambitions to become a green energy exporter. The government’s investment plans come with the launch of the A$240-million H2U Eyre Peninsula gateway hydrogen project, which will see the installation of a 75 MW electrolyser near Whyalla, capable of producing sufficient hydrogen to create 40 000 t/y of ammonia. The project would be the largest green ammonia plant in the world, and is targeted for completion in late 2022. South Australian Premier Steven Marshall said upgrading the jetty will unlock significant investment and export opportunities for South Australia, with hydrogen driving renewed interest in Port Bonython. “South Australia’s ambition to create, use and export green hydrogen is getting global attention, and has great potential to create jobs and sustain long-term investment,” said the Premier. “Maintaining this critical piece of infrastructure will unlock further export opportunities in key markets, particularly across Asia, boosting economic activity and creating jobs in our state. “My government has also been working to assist Australian company H2U to establish connections with potential international customers, and their hydrogen project at Port Bonython is a very exciting one for South Australia. “The A$240-million demonstrator phase of the project is of global significance, but it is just the precursor to a much larger production and export facility, that could see us also strengthen our energy ties with traditional trading partners. “This comes at the perfect time, as we lead our economic recovery from the global coronavirus pandemic.” H2U CEO Dr Attilio Pigneri said the project would help drive the development of the emerging markets for green hydrogen and green ammonia and offers the opportunity to export South Australia’s abundant solar and wind resources to support deep decarbonisation in the global energy, industrial and shipping sectors. “In the energy sector, Japan is leading the way with their plan to introduce green ammonia as a substitute fuel, to help meet its decarbonisation targets,” he said.