The Wits Mining Institute’s (WMI's) Digital Mining Laboratory (DigiMine), at the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits), will be hosting a seminar on digital mining technology from December 8 to 10 at the Wits Club. “The seminar is for anyone interested in digital mining in the underground environment. We will showcase our laboratory and present the laboratory’s research outcomes on developing digital technologies for mining applications,” says WMI director Professor Fred Cawood. He says delegates will learn about the research and case studies developed in recent years by the DigiMine and the WMI, while its partners will also present their leading practice digital systems. The seminar will shed light on digital technology trends within the mining industry and will be headlined by a keynote address by Sibanye-Stillwater CEO Neal Froneman. The keynote address, which will focus on Sibanye-Stillwater’s view of mining in the digital age, will be followed by a range of informative and interactive sessions highlighting technological systems for the mining industry. Attendees will gain first-hand insights into how these have been applied to solve twenty-first-century mining problems. Participants can choose to attend the seminar for a certificate of attendance by attending all the days, or for a certificate of competence by successfully completing the class work and assessment. The seminar is a Wits-accredited short course and is registered with the Engineering Council of South Africa – giving participants 7.2 continuous professional development points. There will also be a visit to the DigiMine laboratory, demonstrating the process within the laboratory, as well as highlighting best practice technology and systems. Selected postgraduate research students and technology partners will present their work and demonstrate their solutions, highlighting the unique and symbiotic relationship between the DigiMine's research agenda and industry in general. Additional case studies on best practice systems will be presented and delegates will have the opportunity to participate in various simulated environments as individuals and in groups.