PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Tasmanian government on Tuesday announced a A$2.6-million investment to investigate the feasibility of three large-scale renewable hydrogen projects in the region, with iron-ore miner Fortescue also unveiling plans for hydrogen in the region. ASX-listed Origin Energy’s export-scale green hydrogen and ammonia plant, which is planned to produce some 420 000 t/y of green ammonia, and ABEL Energy’s planned 100 MW green hydrogen and methanol project at the Bell Bay Advanced Manufacturing Zone, would benefit from the government investment. Grange Resources’ proposed 90 MW to 100 MW renewable hydrogen project to provide process heat at its Port Latta facility, will also be investigated. The new studies will be funded under the government’s A$50-million Tasmanian Renewable Hydrogen Industry Development Funding Program, which forms the backbone of the Tasmanian Renewable Hydrogen Action Plan. Minister for Energy Guy Barnett also announced miner Fortescue Metal’s potential development of a 250 MW hydrogen and green ammonia production facility at Bell Bay, which is targeted for investment decision in 2021. The project envisages the construction of a 250 MW green hydrogen plant at the Bell Bay Industrial Precinct with green ammonia production capacity of 250 000 t/y for domestic and international export. It has the capacity to be one of the world’s largest green hydrogen plants, powered entirely by Tasmanian renewable energy. The project is targeted for an investment decision by the Fortescue board in 2021. “Subject to this decision, the project has the potential to create more than 350 construction jobs and 100 operational roles for the initial phase. Using Tasmania’s renewable energy resources, there is opportunity for further expansion,” Barnett said. Fortescue CEO Elizabeth Gaines said that subject to detailed feasibility analysis, the Tasmania project would be an important step in demonstrating Fortescue’s intention to position Australia at the forefront of the establishment of a bulk export market for green hydrogen. “Fortescue has a successful track record of identifying and assessing opportunities and by building on our expertise and supply chain capabilities, we will ensure that the financial and project execution discipline that Fortescue is renowned for is applied to projects developed by Fortescue Future Industries. “Partnering with the Tasmanian government to harness the abundant renewable energy in Tasmania, we see potential to create a significant new green industry,” Gaines said. Barnett said that Fortescue’s announcement was more confirmation of Tasmania’s competitive advantages in renewable hydrogen production, based on the region’s low-cost, abundant and reliable renewable energy resources, access to plentiful fresh water and prime ‘hydrogen hub’ locations such as the Bell Bay Advanced Manufacturing Zone. “That’s why the Budget locks in A$16-million across the forward estimates for the Tasmanian Renewable Hydrogen Development Fund that will help to kick-start the renewable hydrogen industry in Tasmania, with these studies signalling the first step in this process. “Although we are not progressing smaller projects from this round, the Tasmanian government remains committed to supporting large and smaller-scale renewable hydrogen projects in order to build and demonstrate our renewable hydrogen capabilities, test our regulatory frameworks and build social licence.” Minister for State Growth Michael Ferguson said the key to making these smaller projects viable is clearly identifying what the end use will be in Tasmania. “To support this the government will be fast-tracking work on identifying hydrogen domestic offtake opportunities in Tasmania in areas such as transport, commercial applications and agricultural use that will allow these proposals to progress,” Ferguson said. “In doing so, we will work closely with business and industry to ensure all opportunities are explored. “To facilitate this, in delivering the 2020/21 Budget, we have announced Metro Tasmania will be tasked to trial zero emissions buses in Tasmania – electric or hydrogen, with both a northern and southern trial to be underway within the next two years. We are very keen to explore this particular opportunity in respect of hydrogen as a fuel source.”