PERTH (miningweekly.com) – A consortium led by the University of New South Wales (UNSW), advisory firm Deloitte and management consultancy Baringa Partners will undertake a German-Australian supply chain feasibility study of hydrogen produced from renewables. The government selected the consortium to undertake the feasibility study, following a competitive process, and the signing of a landmark agreement between Australia and Germany this year, to explore the potential for closer collaboration on hydrogen supply. The consortium will begin work to identify barriers and the optimal approaches to establishing a hydrogen supply chain between Germany and Australia. The Australian consortium will work with peers in Germany to analyse the entire hydrogen supply chain, including production, storage, transport, recovery and use, to establish how Australia can best deliver renewable hydrogen to Germany. The study will also consider opportunities for trade of technological innovations that could transform the value chains between the countries. Federal Trade Minister Simon Birmingham said the feasibility study was a major step in establishing a hydrogen supply chain with Germany that has ambitions to become a major user of clean energy into the future. “Partnering with future importers of hydrogen, such as Germany, will be critical to growing demand for Australian hydrogen and accelerating industry development,” Birmingham said. “This study will help build on existing hydrogen collaborations Australia has with other key energy trading partners including Japan, the Republic of Korea and most recently Singapore, all of which will be critical to building a world-leading hydrogen industry right here in Australia.” Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said the study would help pave Australia’s path to becoming a powerhouse in hydrogen production and exports. “Investment in clean hydrogen through international cooperation is critical to growing an Australian hydrogen industry, delivering jobs, strengthening our economy, and reducing emissions. “This international partnership will help to lower the price of hydrogen, which will get us closer to our goal in the Technology Investment Roadmap of producing hydrogen for under A$2/kg. “Reaching this goal will help us to become the obvious partner of choice for hydrogen across the globe,” Taylor said. Resources Minister Keith Pitt said Australia has a mix of all of the key ingredients needed to be a major global player in a thriving clean hydrogen industry. “We have abundant land, abundant energy resources and extensive carbon storage reservoirs, coupled with long standing experience and an excellent track record and reputation as a global energy exporter,” Pitt said. The UNSW-led consortium has a well-established track record in delivering outcomes for both industry and government. The government is providing A$363 000 to the consortium to deliver the study, with the Australian consortia contributing A$1.1-million of in-kind and cash contributions. Data has previously revealed that Australia’s future hydrogen industry had the potential to generate around 8 000 new jobs by 2050, many in regional Australia, with exports estimated to be worth around A$11-billion a year in additional gross domestic product. To date, the Australian government has already committed more than A$570-million to back this industry’s development.