Major mining companies operating in Peru, including Newmont, Freeport-McMoRan and Anglo American, are ramping down operations to comply with the 15-days self-quarantine that President Martin Vizcarra announced on Sunday. The country, which at 13:00 local time on Monday had 89 confirmed cases of Covid-19, has declared a national state of emergency, which enacted 15 days of mandatory quarantine and closed its borders in an effort to contain the spreading of the virus. Newmont, the world's largest gold mining company, confirmed that it was ramping down mining operations at Yanacocha, but said gold production from leach pads and critical safety and environmental activities would continue. Yanacocha has been operating normally since the beginning of the year and represents about 3% of Newmont’s 2020 attributable gold production outlook. “While we have no confirmed Covid-19 cases among Newmont’s workforce or any major disruptions to production at our other sites at this time, we are proactively taking steps to protect our people and the continuity of our business during this global pandemic," said CEO Tom Palmer. Freeport-McMoRan said the 53.56%-owned Cerro Verde mine had transitioned to a care-and-maintenance status. During this period, onsite personnel would be limited to critical activities necessary to maintain the facilities pending a return to normal operations. In 2019, Cerro Verde produced one-billion pounds of copper and 29-million pounds of molybdenum. TSX-listed Pan American also temporarily shut down its four mines in Peru, Shahuindo, La Arena, Huaron and Morococha. "Our primary concern is the health and safety of our employees and contractors, and the communities in which they live and work," said CEO Michael Steinmann. On Tuesday morning, Anglo American announced that it had withdrawn its 10 000-strong construction workforce from the Quellaveco copper project to comply with the government-imposed coronavirus measures. Quellaveco is expected to begin production in 2022, with an expected capital cost of $5-billion to $5.3-billion. During the first ten years of full production, the mine is expected to produce 300 000 t/y at a cash cost of $1.05/lb.