PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has welcomed the draft Productivity Commission report into resources sector regulation, saying a more robust, transparent and accountable regulatory system will strengthen the minerals industry once it emerges from the Covid-19 pandemic. The draft report highlighted the urgent need for better regulation of Australia’s minerals development to reduce delays, create jobs, attract investment and support regional economies and communities. The report noted that while all governments have adopted elements of leading practice there remains considerable room for improvement. “All jurisdictions could learn from each other. A consistent theme is that approval processes have become more complex, take longer and are less certain, for no apparent environmental benefit,” Commissioner Lisa Gropp said. Priorities to improve the regulatory system include effective risk- and outcome-based approaches, clearer guidance and stronger engagement with industry, the use of target approval timelines, improved coordination between regulators to reduce duplication, and greater engagement and transparency to build community confidence. “Few of the issues raised in this study are new. Enduring reform will require governments to provide clear policies and set expectations for regulators, ensuring they have the resources they need to do their job well,” Gropp said. MCA CEO Tania Constable on Tuesday said that the report’s identification and criticism of duplication and poor coordination, inconsistent requirements, complexity and regulator capacity and accountability should come as no surprise given similar findings in multiple past reviews. “Regulation can be efficient and effective while safeguarding the environment, supporting the growth of Australia’s world-leading minerals industry and sustaining strong communities. “The implementation of many of the leading practice approaches highlighted in the draft report will help achieve these aims,” Constable said. She added that the Commission’s final report should signal to government the need to get on with long-overdue reforms to support a growing and sustainable minerals industry and a stronger Australia.