Mines and projects are ramping down in Argentina, after a mandatory social isolation declaration was issued, with Yamana Gold and Hochschild Mining confirming on Friday that their operations in that country would be reduced and Lithium Americas suspending construction at the Cauchari-Olaroz project. The mandatory social isolation declaration, among other matters, significantly and immediately restricts travel, and imposes mandatory self-isolation of all persons until March 31, in an effort to combat the spread of Covid-19. On Thursday, Argentina had 79 confirmed cases of coronavirus and no deaths. To comply with the government regulations, Yamana has now announced it would implement a temporary, partial demobilisation of its workforce at its Cerro Moro mine in Santa Cruz province, while efforts at the Agua Rica project, in Catamarca, would also be reduced. Yamana said it would work with a limited workforce comprising employees and contractors primarily from out of province during the isolation period. Underground operations would be reduced and Cerro Moro would operate during this period largely from its openpit operations and from stockpiled material. Employees and contractors who come from Santa Cruz province would be sent home in compliance with the mandatory social isolation declaration. Other employees and contractors would remain housed and provided for in the company’s permanent camp at site. Yamana said the temporary suspension should not have a meaningful impact on its production and cash flows, as Cerro Moro had performed well so far in the quarter. At Agua Rica, the slowdown should not have much of an impact as efforts were mostly corporate related as the company advances the feasibility study for the project. Meanwhile, Lithium Americas said that construction activities at the Cauchari-Olaroz lithium project in Jujuy, had been suspended and cautioned that the previous estimate for completion of construction by early next year could be affected by the move. “We are in the process of safely demobilizing the over-1 000-person construction workforce in support of the government of Argentina's measures to control the spread of Covid-19. Our development of this world-class lithium project is well advanced and we would expect to be able to resume construction once the suspension is lifted,” said Lithium Americas president and CEO Jon Evans. Hochschild said on Friday it had temporarily shut operations at its San Jose mine. The company halted its Peruvian operations earlier this week. Many mining and exploration companies around the world have implemented strict controls at their sites to help curb the spread of coronavirus, which has infected more than 200 000 people globally and killed over 8 700.