TSX-listed Teranga Gold Corporation’s production, development and exploration are proceeding as planned, and the consolidated first-quarter production is likely to be between 85 000 oz and 90 000 oz, as expected. In a statement on March 25, COO Paul Chawrun indicated that this would be the Wahgnion gold project’s strongest quarter of the year, and Sabodala’s softest quarter owing to lower grades processed as a result of pit sequencing. Currently, both the Sabodala gold mine, in Senegal, and the Wahgnion gold mine, in Burkina Faso, are operating as expected. In addition, the development work to integrate the Massawa project with Sabodala, as well as Teranga’s 2020 exploration activities are continuing as planned. The company is also working with the employees at Sabodala, Wahgnion and its various exploration sites to ensure continuity of operations while admittance to sites is being restricted amid the current global uncertainty. To minimise the impact of any potential supply chain disruptions, Teranga has been building an inventory of critical supplies since January and confirmed that supplies are continuing to arrive at both sites. Additionally, Teranga has implemented precautionary measures to protect the health and safety of the company's workforce and to maintain business continuity. To date, there have been no confirmed cases of Covid-19 at any of the company's operations or offices, and employees at the corporate and regional offices are now working remotely. “Employee health and safety has always been a top priority at Teranga and we are taking extensive precautions in response to the Covid-19 pandemic,” Teranga president and CEO Richard Young said. He said the team had enhanced medical services at each mine site and ramped up infectious disease education, prevention and management protocols across the company. Both Sabodala and Wahgnion have entered an isolation period and a team of national and expatriate staff have volunteered to stay on site beyond their normal rotations to run the operations. “This measure, together with the many other precautionary directives already in place, are to protect both our staff and the local communities around our mines from the virus,” he noted.