Canadian diversified major Teck Resources on Thursday announced a carbon intensity target for 2030, as part of its new sustainability strategy and goals. The miner, which already committed to be carbon-neutral across its operations and activities by 2050, said it would reduce carbon intensity by 33% in the next decade. The major said it would procure half of its electricity demands in Chile from clean energy this year and 100% by 2030. It would also accelerate the adoption of zero-emissions alternatives for transportation by displacing the equivalent of 1 000 internal combustion engine vehicles in the next five years. Last month, Teck withdrew an application to build a C$20.6-billion Frontier oil sands mine in Alberta, citing in part the country's need to reconcile resource development and climate change. “At Teck, we are always challenging ourselves to improve sustainability performance, so we can be sure we are providing the mining products needed for a cleaner future in the most responsible way possible,” said president and CEO Don Lindsay. “We have set ambitious new goals for carbon reduction, water stewardship, health and safety, and other areas because we believe that a better world is made possible through better mining.” In terms of water, Teck would transition to seawater or low-quality water sources for all operations in water-scarce regions by 2040. It would also consider milling and tailings technologies that use less water for new mines and any mine life extensions at existing mines. The mining company is also working towards disposing zero industrial waste by 2040. By 2025, it will implement a responsible producer programme and “product passport” that is traceable through the value chain. “We established our first sustainability strategy and goals a decade ago and are proud of our progress to date,” said senior VP for sustainability and external affairs Marcia Smith. “We know there is more work to do, and our updated strategy and new milestone goals provide us with a clear roadmap to advance our work to protect the environment, collaborate with communities and governments, and foster a workforce that is respectful, safe, inclusive and diverse.”