PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland Resources Council (QRC) has welcomed measures announced by the state government to protect the economy, as both state and federal governments classified mining as an "essential service". “As an industry, we are following the advice of health authorities to minimise the impact on the one in seven working Queenslanders whose livelihood is linked directly or indirectly to the resources industry,” said QRC CEO Ian Macfarlane. “The QRC is in direct contact with Queensland’s Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young and both the state and federal resource Ministers Dr Anthony Lynham and Keith Pitt. “The Prime Minister, through his National Cabinet, announced mine sites as essential activities and the Queensland government today reiterated the importance of the sector and amid current conditions it was an 'essential service' to Queensland,” Macfarlane added. The QRC welcomed the announcement by the Queensland government to allow all Queensland companies to defer payroll tax payments for six months, in response to Covid-19, with Macfarlane saying it would boost much needed cash flow to thousands of companies across the state. “Companies are already taking steps to slow the spread of Covid-19 as we do all we can to keep our workforce and their communities healthy. New procedures include health questionnaires for visitors/suppliers, temperature measurement at mine site entries and before flights to mine sites, improved separation procedures including head office staff working from home, staggered crib breaks, and no non-essential visitors to mine sites. “As well, where possible, essential service crews such as Emergency Response and Pump Crews are being kept in isolation from the broader workforce. “In order to ease pressure and help lighten the load on health workers in regional areas from people presenting for Covid-19 testing, resource companies are also waiving requirements for Doctors Certificates for general illness leave.” Macfarlane said that as the Covid-19 situation evolved, it would be critical for the resources industry to heed the advice from health authorities. “It is also critical as an industry we continue to devote our full attention to implementing the processes and procedures in accordance with the latest advice.” “While these are turbulent times amid the Covid-19 response, the resources industry will continue to play its central role in the economic productivity of the state and lives of all Queenslanders.”