PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Gold miner Resolute Mining has maintained its production outlook for 2020 as operations in Africa continue to run despite the systematic spread of Covid-19. However, the miner said on Thursday that it had taken actions to ensure that the impact of Covid-19 was mitigated across all aspects of the company’s operations. “The safety of our people is and will always be a Resolute priority. We do not have any cases of Covid-19 among our workforce in Australia and Africa and are implementing processes to ensure we limit the risk of infection,” MD and CEO John Welborn said. “All non-essential travel has been suspended, both domestically and internationally, and we are following World Health Organisation guidelines for isolation and mitigation. Strict hygiene measures and social distancing protocols have been implemented at all sites and company locations. “Personnel at our corporate offices in Perth and London are working remotely. At Syama and Mako, we are limiting the numbers of people working while maintaining full production.” Welborn noted that while the Covid-19 pandemic posed unique risks and challenges to miners operating in Africa, Resolute had robust foundations to sustain operations, including ore stockpiles at all three of its currently operating mines that would sustain gold production should Resolute’s future response to an escalation of Covid-19 require a period of reduced mining activity. The company also noted that the vast majority of its manpower was locally based in each jurisdiction, with the company having greatly reduced reliance on expatriate technical personnel. “The challenges presented by Covid-19 continue to change on a daily basis. We are working closely with our employees, contractors and stakeholders, including our host governments, to safeguard our operations. The commitment of our people to maintain production is commendable and consistent with how Resolute responds to challenges,” said Welborn. “Further operational changes will be made where necessary in response to the global pandemic. We will remain resolute, and are focused on keeping our people safe, and wherever possible, keeping our mills running to produce gold.” Meanwhile, Resolute on Thursday also announced that it had successfully completed a new $300-million debt refinancing, with first drawdown occurring on March 25 to refinance the company’s existing senior debt and to complete repayment of the Mako project loan.