JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – The coronavirus was reducing the consumption of South Africa’s mined products to China and would likely cause a fall in prices, Menar MD Vuslat Bayoğlu said on Monday. “There’s a huge disruption and people might be under estimating what’s happening. The reality is, when China’s in trouble, the world’s in trouble,” Bayoğlu said in an interview with Mining Weekly. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video.) Metals and minerals like manganese, chrome, iron-ore and metallurgical coal were not being consumed as before. While commodity prices were not feeling it yet, the reality was slowing economic growth and lower steel production in China. “I think the prices are going to come down drastically, and this will not be good for the mining industry,” Bayoğlu predicted. The crash of the Purchasing Managers Index of China led him to believe that the serious impact of the coronavirus on metals and minerals was possibly being under-estimated Crude oil has crashed. Brent crude was at $33.09/bl on Monday morning, a fall of 27% and the worst one-day fall for Brent since the start of the first Gulf war in 1991. US crude fell 27% to $30/bl. “Okay, it’s not only linked to the coronavirus but this price war between countries, but the reality is the world economy is not really doing well,” he said. His information was that the captains of some ships and their crews were refusing to offload the cargoes in China. “Shipping companies are in trouble because of the disruption. Because of coronavirus, their staff do not want to go to China. So, there’s a reality. Even though China is trying their best to keep things under control and we are the biggest supplier of manganese and chrome and one of the big suppliers of iron-ore to China, and those business are going to be affected. “If you think about a manganese mine producing manganese but not being able to offload that manganese, that company will be badly affected. If they don't get the revenue, after a while, they’ll be in financial trouble,” he said. MANGANESE PROJECT Menar expects to be awarded a water-use licence in the second quarter of 2020 for its East Manganese project, in the Northern Cape. The company’s move into manganese – from its controlling and management positions in Canyon Coal, Zululand Anthracite Colliery and Kangra Coal – is part of its strategic diversification into minerals and metals beyond coal. Last year, the hands-on investment company acquired East Manganese through its mining development subsidiary, Sitatunga Resources. “We were planning to start in May and we’ll see what’s going to happen with the price of manganese as we wait for our water-use licence. “Once we’ve got our water-use licence, we’ll look at the market and we’ll see if we should start the project or if we should wait a little bit and inform the authorities regarding what’s happening,” he said. Most of the manganese mines, especially medium- and small-sized mines, have been unprofitable for some time. “But I’m concerned again that manganese and chrome are going to be affected harder, especially chrome. The ferrochrome business has already been hit,” he said. The Menar group’s Zululand Anthracite Colliery supplies anthracite to ferrochrome company Samancor, which has announced retrenchments, as well as Richards Bay Minerals. “They all supply products to China and f they can’t supply to China, they will slow down with their production. All the companies will have to make a call at some point. If the coronavirus is not under control, production will have to be looked at and alternatives markets sought,” he added. Manganese and chrome mining and marketing company Assore on Monday announced its delisting from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange after 70 years.