Gold miner Pan African Resources has implemented the necessary measures at all its operations to conduct essential services during the remainder of the national lockdown period ending April 16, as approved by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. These essential services, specific to Pan African’s operations, include security services, pumping and ventilation activities, metallurgical plant maintenance, inspection of underground workings, management of tailings deposition facilities, waste management and water treatment facilities. Additionally, Pan African says it is conducting limited surface re-mining and processing activities at the Elikhulu Tailings Retreatment Plant, in Evander, Mpumalanga, and at its Barberton Tailings Retreatment Plant, also in Mpumalanga. The company says these surface operations are operating at about 70% of normal capacity. Pan African also owns and operates the Barberton Mines complex and Evander Mines’ 8 Shaft Pillar operations, which have halted gold production for the lockdown period. Of the company’s total staff and contractor complement, only 20% are involved in the essential services, in addition to security staff. Other employees and contractors remain at home. For the remaining working staff, Pan African has housed them in restricted-access, dedicated housing facilities for the duration of the lockdown, while they undergo continuous temperature monitoring. The company also has standby medical support and rigorous social distancing and hygiene protocols in place. Pan African has not yet set an updated production guidance for this year. "In this time of crisis, we are heartened by the manner in which all stakeholders in the mining industry are collaborating. Pan African recognises that the adverse effects of the Covid-19 pandemic will be severe and far reaching. “The impact will be even more pronounced in areas with limited resources and poverty. Recognising the economic and social hardship that communities and employees will experience during the national lockdown, we will embark on support programmes, in addition to our existing initiatives, to alleviate this hardship,” says CEO Cobus Loots.