PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian resources sector has held a round-table with federal Resources, Water and Northern Territory Minister Keith Pitt to discuss the ongoing ongoing impacts of the corona virus (COVID-19) outbreak and the bushfire crisis. Speaking after the round-table, Pitt said he was greatly encouraged by the show of strength by the resources sector. “It was very helpful to hear the on the on-the-ground view about the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak and the sector’s contributions to bushfire-affected communities," Pitt said. “It is clear resources exports are holding up with companies activating contingency plans to ensure their supply chains are maintained. The key message I received is that the resources sector remains a reliable supplier to our major trading partners and will continue to underpin the Australian economy.” The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) on Thursday said that the resources sector would continue to work with the government to ensure that the industry remained strong during the COVID-19 pandemic. Australia’s resources industry will continue to work with the Morrison Government to ensure the industry remains safe and strong during the COVID-19 pandemic. MCA CEO Tania Constable said that the Minister outlined the government’s response to the pandemic and made it clear that the government’s priority was to protect important industries, regional jobs and the community. “The industry’s advice to the government was that while COVID-19 was so far having only a minimal effect on site operations, there was no room for complacency and the need for the government and industry to work closely on monitoring and response was crucial,” she said. The MCA will soon convene a working group of its members to ensure mine sites stay safe, open and in production as demand for Australia’s world-class minerals remains strong. “Business confidence is essential during this period. Through encouraging exploration and investment, the Government’s stimulus package is good news for the country’s junior miners. Australian mining contributes to national economic strength and is responsive and responsible, particularly during times of challenge. “Mining provides an economic bedrock for the Australian Government to meet its immediate and long term challenges,” Constable said. In addition to the MCA, the New South Wales Minerals Council, Chamber of Mines and Energy Western Australia, South Australian Chamber of Mines and Energy and Queensland Resources Council, all took part in the round table.