Dual-listed Endeavour Mining says each of its operations continue to manage and respond to coronavirus (Covid-19) within the framework of the company’s incident management and response plan, which was activated at the outbreak of the virus and has been validated by an epidemiologist special adviser to Endeavour. “The company places the safety and wellbeing of its employees and contractors as the highest priority,” it says. A business continuity programme is in place to protect employees while ensuring the safe operation of the company. Since early March, access to all mine sites has been strictly controlled with health screening in place for visitors, employees and contractors and all non-essential travel has been cancelled. The company has also asked any employee or contractor feeling unwell to stay at home. On March 14, Endeavour was informed that an employee at the Houndé mine in Burkina Faso tested positive for Covid-19. The employee experienced mild symptoms hours after arriving at site, following his return from the UK. In line with the company’s Covid-19 protocol and procedures, the Burkinabe health authorities were immediately notified, and the employee was placed in quarantine. The small number of people who were in contact with the employee have all been identified and have also been placed in quarantine as part of the preventative measures. As the employee did not show symptoms upon arrival and passed the mandatory health screening, the company further increased its preventive measures by introducing a mandatory 14-day quarantine period for any employees or contractors arriving in Côte d’Ivoire or Burkina Faso. Endeavour says it has not witnessed any impact to production or operations at any of its mines or exploration activities. It also indicates that it has sufficient inventory of supplies and equipment, while suppliers have confirmed that placed and forecast orders are intact. Meanwhile, Ghanaian media outlets have reported that an employee at AngloGold Ashanti’s Obuasi mine has tested positive for the Covid-19 virus. The employee is a Ghanaian who lives in the mine’s accommodation and who recently returned from travel abroad, media reports stated.