Galvanised steel sheeting can help to avoid structural failure of buildings through generally assisting with the prevention of white rust, or wet storage stains, says civil engineering and galvanising consultant Terry Smith. Continuous sheet galvanising is a hot-dip process, but is only applied to steel sheets, strips and wire products prior to fabrication. Often called “pre-galvanised” or “galvanised sheeting”, Smith explains that galvanised steel sheeting is a coil of sheet steel (up to 1.8 m wide) which is de-coiled, welded end-on-end and passed through an annealing surface at about 900 °C. Travelling at up to 180 m a minute, the sheet then passes through a bath of molten zinc heated to about 450 °C. As the steel exits the zinc bath, it travels through a series of gas or air-knives, which control the coating mass, which is a cost-effective, abrasion-resistant, corrosion control barrier that will generally “provide a maintenance-free lifespan in excess of 50 years”, he explains. Zinc is at the heart of hot dip galvanising (HDG). Continuous galvanising of steel is a cost effective way of extending steel's service life in most environments, which assists in prolonging the lifespan of buildings, especially in corrosive environments, like those close to the sea. Should damp conditions continue, the zinc corrosion will continue, says Smith, adding that this will, without treatment, lead to structural failure. However, once the zinc carbonate patina has formed, HDG provides “a predictable, slowly corroding barrier”. To prevent going down the structural failure road, he urges industry members to properly consider the environment in which the galvanised steel will be used, and to understand the site conditions and specifics correctly. Smith provided insight into galvanised steel and its corrosion-related benefits during an International Zinc Association (IZA) webinar hosted by Creamer Media on September 16. IZA’s Simon Norton also spoke during the webinar, and gave insight into what galvanised steel is and how it is made, while IZA technology and marketing development director Martin van Leeuwen spoke about additional designations.