PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian government has inked a landmark agreement with Germany to initiate a joint feasibility study into the potential for closer collaboration and the future development of a hydrogen supply chain between the two countries. Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment Simon Birmingham on Friday said partnerships with countries such as Germany would be key to the development of a strong and world-leading hydrogen industry in Australia. “These kinds of partnerships will be critical to further developing our emerging hydrogen industry and Australia’s future as a powerhouse in clean energy exports,” Birmingham said. “Exploring opportunities for future collaboration on commercial scale operations and investments in hydrogen production is vital if Australia is to realise the significant economic benefits and job creation opportunities hydrogen brings. "This study gets the ball rolling on the development of a future hydrogen supply chain with Germany which could lead to billions of dollars in export earnings for Australia and help them meet their future clean energy ambitions. “With Australia well positioned to be a major supplier of low emissions hydrogen, and global demand for hydrogen continuing to grow, we need to continue to develop links with future importers around the world.” Minister for Resources Keith Pitt said the study would look to underpin the future of hydrogen supply and help to inform two-way trade and investment between Australia and Germany. “This kind of cooperation is another step in helping to secure Australia’s clean-energy trading future which is backed by our abundant natural resources and strong history of being a reliable supplier,” Pitt said. “This agreement will open up another new market for our resources and potentially create thousands of new job opportunities for Australians well into the future. “Clean hydrogen is a transformational fuel that can be used to power vehicles, generate heat and electricity, and as a chemical feedstock in major industrial applications. “Australia has what it takes to be a world leader in hydrogen production and exports that will help our trading partners lower their emissions,” Pitt said. Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said collaborating with key partners such as Germany would help to drive down the cost of new hydrogen technologies. “Australia has the natural competitive advantage to be a world leader in exporting hydrogen. The expertise and infrastructure from our gas industry will assist us to use hydrogen as an energy source at home,” Taylor said. “Australia’s future hydrogen industry has the potential to generate 7 600 new jobs by 2050, many in regional Australia, with exports estimated to be worth around A$11-billion a year in additional gross domestic product. This is why the Australian government has committed more than A$500-million to back this industry’s development.” This partnership with Germany comes in addition to existing commitments Australia has already sought through the National Hydrogen Strategy with other like-minded economies including Japan, South Korea and Singapore.