PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Mining major Rio Tinto has announced the resignation of CEO Jean-Sebastian Jacques, iron-ore CEO Chris Salisbury and group executive of corporate relations Simone Niven, following the Juukan Forge rock shelters debacle. The resignations come after the August publication of the Board Review of Cultural Heritage Management, undertaken in response to the destruction of the rockshelters in May this year. The company has announced that Jacques will remain in the role as group CEO until the end of March next year, or until a suitable successor has been appointed, allowing business continuity to be maintained. Salisbury would step down with immediate effect, and will leave Rio at the end of December this year, with current rail, port and core services MD Ivan Vella to replace him on an interim basis, following a handover period. Niven will also step down, and will leave the group at the end of December, after completing an orderly transition of her responsibilities. “What happened at Juukan was wrong and we are determined to ensure that the destruction of a heritage site of such exceptional archeological and cultural significance never occurs again at a Rio Tinto operation,” said chairperson Simon Thompson. “We are also determined to regain the trust of the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura people and other traditional owners. We have listened to our stakeholders’ concerns that a lack of individual accountability undermines the group’s ability to rebuild that trust and to move forward to implement the changes identified in the board review. “I would like to thank Jacques for his strong leadership of the group since becoming CEO in 2016. During that time, he has led the best safety performance in Rio Tinto’s history, simplified the portfolio, divested the group’s coal assets, established a clear strategy to address climate change and generated exceptional shareholder returns. His leadership during the Covid-19 pandemic, in particular, has been exemplary,” said Thompson. “I would also like to thank Salisbury and Niven for the contribution both have made to the success of Rio Tinto over many years. I know that all three individuals, like the rest of the board, deeply regret the destruction of the Juukan rockshelters.” In order to enhance board engagement in Australia, nonexecutive director Simon McKeon has now been appointed senior independent director with immediate effect. This newly created board role will complement the existing senior independent director role, which will continue to be performed by Sam Laidlaw.