The Environment Department of the Xunta de Galicia has formally issued a negative impact declaration for Proyecto Touro, denying dual-listed Atalaya Mining’s application to restart copper production at the former openpit mine. The regional government turned down the project’s environmental impact assessment in January, citing concern over the mine’s impact on the Ulla river and related protected ecosystems. Atalaya said on Wednesday that it was assessing its options to progress Proyecto Touro and that these could include several types of appeal or modified project proposals to address the concerns of the Xunta de Galicia. It also noted that the restart proposal for Proyecto Touro included managing past environmental liabilities and using transfer mining techniques with zero water discharge. Flotation tailings were to be stored in a plastic-lined impoundment built with compacted rock walls using techniques similar to those used in water dam construction. The Proyecto Touro copper project comprises several deposits of which four – Arinteiro, Vieiro, Bama and Brandelos – have previously been mined; and two – Monte de las Minas and Arca – have not been mined. According to a 2018 prefeasibility study, the project has proven and probable reserves of 90.91-million tonnes grading 0.43% copper, for contained copper of 392 000 t. The study envisages the construction of an openpit mine and concentrator, with average yearly production of 30 000 t of copper and 70 000 oz of silver in concentrate. Meanwhile, Atalaya on Wednesday also reported its first-quarter results, announcing a 29% year-on-year increase in copper production to 13 229 t. The miner processed 3.4-million tonnes with an average copper head grade of 0.47% and a recovery rate of 82.62%. Compared with the first quarter of 2019, throughput increased by 40%, while recoveries decreased by 8%. On a quarter-on-quarter comparison, copper production was similar as a result of a 17% higher throughput offsetting the lower grade and recoveries. In late March, early April, operations at Proyecto Riotinto stopped for four full days while clarity was sought on a royal decree regarding requirements to prevent the spread of Covid-19. The mine is operating again. “During the first quarter of 2020 our operations at the Riotinto mine continued the successful ramp-up of the newly expanded plant to achieve design capacity. While conscious of the potential impact Covid-19 could have to our current operations, we maintain our production guidance and continue to monitor both volatility in the copper price and the company's cash costs structure. "Early in the quarter the unprecedented Covid-19 crisis was professionally handled by the site teams in coordination with the regional authorities. A short production interruption was stipulated by the Spanish government but to date there have been no known cases of Covid-19 amongst employees of the company or its contractors. We continuously follow the evolution of the situation and regard the safety and health of our employees and the communities in which we operate as the highest priority,” said CEO Alberto Lavandeira. Atalaya’s guidance for copper production in 2020 is estimated to be in the range of 55 000 t to 58 000 t.