PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Diversified miner BHP has struck a partnership with health care providers in Queensland to support the capacity of on the ground health services by developing and servicing Covid-19 testing centres in Central Queensland. The centres are part of a A$7.59-million project developed in partnership with the Mackay Hospital and Health Services (MHHS) and Vanguard Health to ease the strain on regional health services and hospitals throughout the Covid-19 response. The centres will be delivered in Moranbah and Proserpine by private health provider Vanguard Health, and will operate seven days a week, and will run for an initial six months, with the opportunity to be extended. Managed by Queensland Hospital and Health Services, and integrated with the Queensland health system to provide a doctor-led service with nursing support staff, the centres will be available for anyone in the community to get assessed and tested for Covid-19. Once established, the centres have the capability of seeing from 100 patients per day in each clinic site, and offered a mix of drive-through, walk-in, tele-health and face-to-face clinician consultations. The Queensland Resources Council has welcomed the investment, with CEO Ian Macfarlane saying the establishment of the Covid-19 testing centers was another example of the mining sector’s commitment to ensuring the safety of workers and local communities. “Our sector always has and always will put safety as its number one priority including working with health authorities to assist with greater resources during this outbreak. “I congratulate BHP on this significant contribution into the health infrastructure of the Isaac and Whitsunday regions,” Macfarlane said. “While it is critical for the economy that we continue to safely operate our mines, we understand the community concerns. Our sector has not only adhered to the advice of the state’s Chief Health Officer but has implemented more safety measures to protect the men and women working in the resources sector, their colleagues, their families and their communities.” The investment is part of BHP’s A$50-million Vital Resources Fund, established to help support regional Australian communities in its areas of operation, which are facing the significant challenge of the Covid-19 pandemic.