NYSE- and TSX-listed Barrick Gold on April 8 published its 2019 Sustainability Report, which indicates that the company continues to strengthen its reputation as a trusted partner in its host communities globally. President and CEO Mark Bristow notes in the report that the company is actively working to build a more sustainable mining sector that is fit to attract the next generation of industry leaders. Last year, Barrick operated with zero fatalities and had reduced lost-time injuries in Africa and the Middle East. However, despite these improvements, the company’s overall total reportable injury frequency rate rose, partly owing to newly combined assets in Nevada. The company recorded zero major environmental incidents in 2019 and exceeded its water efficiency target of 70%. Barrick says it has in place a climate risk management strategy and remains vigilant in monitoring its tailings storage facilities. Bristow points out that the company distributed more than $9-billion to host country governments, its workforce, suppliers and host communities last year. The company also employed more than 21 800 locals in its respective operations, which amounts to 97% of its employees being natives to where the company operates. Barrick spent $4.4-billion on goods and services from businesses in host countries last year. Currently, Barrick is helping to manage the impacts of Covid-19 on its people and business, including by implementing strict hygiene protocols at all sites, and working closely with clinics and hospitals in its host communities to ensure they are properly resourced. The miner has donated $530 000 to Zambia to support the country in combating and containing the Covid-19 pandemic. In Tanzania, where Barrick and the government operate Twiga Minerals as a joint venture, the company contributed $1.7-million in the form of critical equipment and expertise to help prevent the spread of the virus in Tanzania. Of this amount, $960 000 is destined for the national level, $505 000 to the regional level and $250 000 to the local level.