Russia has condemned President Donald Trump's executive order encouraging the US to engage in exploration of the Moon and other celestial bodies. The executive order, published by the White House this week, states that “Americans should have the right to engage in commercial exploration, recovery and use of resources in outer space, consistent with applicable law”. The order states that the US does not view outer space as a global commons. “Accordingly, it shall be the policy of the United States to encourage international support for the public and private recovery and use of resources in outer space, consistent with applicable law.” The executive order questions whether the 1979 agreement governing the activities of states on the Moon and other celestial bodies (the Moon agreement) establishes the legal framework for nation states concerning the recovery and use of space resources. The US has neither signed, nor ratified the Moon agreement and the order points out that only 18 countries have ratified the agreement. Moreover, differences between the Moon agreement and the 1967 treaty on principles governing the activities of states in the exploration and use of outer space, Including the Moon and other celestial bodies — which the US and 108 other countries have joined — also contribute to uncertainty regarding the right to recover and use space resources, the order notes. The executive order states that successful long-term exploration and scientific discovery of the Moon, Mars, and other celestial bodies will require partnership with commercial entities to recover and use resources, including water and certain minerals, in outer space. It notes that uncertainty regarding the right to recover and use space resources, including the extension of the right to commercial recovery and use of lunar resources; however, has discouraged some commercial entities from participating in this enterprise. In response to the executive order, Russian space agency Roscosmos deputy director general on international cooperation Sergey Saveliev says attempts to “expropriate outer space and aggressive plans to actually seize territories of other planets hardly set the countries [on course for] fruitful cooperation”. “The history knows examples of a country starting to seize territories for its own benefit – everyone remembers the outcome,” Saveliev added.