In response to President Cyril Ramaphosa’s call to action, mineral sands producer and beneficiation company Richards Bay Minerals (RBM) has undertaken a series of measures against Covid-19 in its operations and is working with other businesses and industry bodies in the King Cetshwayo district to support government’s efforts to combat the spread of the coronavirus in communities. As part of this initiative, RBM has immediately invested R100 000 to provide necessary hygiene products, including 2 850 bottles of hand sanitiser, 12 000 surgical gloves, 1 200 N95-standard masks to health centres and communities within the King Cetshwayo district municipality. The products will be handed over to the district health officials for distribution to needy families to help them adhere to the strict hygiene requirements aimed at alleviating the spread of the coronavirus. RBM MD Werner Duvenhage says this donation adds to the company’s substantial investments in the community through its social and labour plan, which in 2019 alone amounted to almost R100-million. “We will continue to work with the wider business community in Richards Bay and the district health authorities to help fight this crisis and create sustainable growth in our communities.” RBM curtailed operations from March 27 as part of the national lockdown, and has implemented many additional safety measures, including strict social distancing guidelines, heightened cleaning and sanitation, and pre-entry screenings. Duvenhage adds that, despite the global impact of the coronavirus, “this is not a time to panic and we applaud President Ramaphosa and his government for their decisive response to date”. The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health has acknowledged the contribution and commended RBM for the initiative, saying that “it confirms that the government is not alone in the fight against coronavirus”. "This demonstrates how the public-private partnership is particularly important during these trying times. The provision of the gloves and masks will indeed address the shortages we are currently experiencing in our health facilities and which are basic in preventing the virus from spreading," the department’s district office comments.