PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Australian mining companies are digging deep to fund bushfire relief as flames ravage the country.

Some 26 people have died and more than 2 000 homes have been destroyed thus far, with the World Wide Fund for Nature estimating that some 1.25-billion animals may have perished, with fires so far having burned through some 5.8-million ha across Australia.

Mining major Rio Tinto has donated A$1-million to bushfire relief and recovery efforts, with the funds going towards the Red Cross’ disaster and relief efforts Fellow major BHP has also announced that it will donate A$2-million to the Red Cross to support relief efforts in bushfire impacted regions, while iron-ore miner Fortescue has also pledged A$1-million to the Minderoo Foundation Fire Fund, to assist the communities impacted by the bushfires. The Minderoo Foundation, which was established by Fortescue founder and chairperson Andrew Forrest and his wife Nicola Forrest, has pledged A$70-million towards relief efforts, with A$10-million in funding going towards specialist volunteers from Western Australia, a further A$10-million in immediate bushfire relief funding and a A$50-million investment to support the development of a long-term blueprint for fire resilience. Minderoo estimated that some 1 250 volunteers from Western Australia would be needed to assist in firefighting and recovery efforts in Queensland, Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia, with the foundation covering the travel and accommodation expenses of these volunteers. “With incredible courage and determination, Australians have united to help those devastated by these bushfires,” Forrest said. “We can all be proud of the efforts we have witnessed across the country to support those fighting the bushfires, those affected by them, and those seeking to provide support to people and wildlife. We extend our deepest sympathy and hope to all those affected. “At Minderoo Foundation, we want to provide immediate relief because, like so many other West Australians, we mourn the hardships of our fellow countrymen and women. We recognise that we don’t have all the answers, but we want to understand what communities need and do our bit to help them now and as they regroup in the coming months.” Meanwhile, Newcrest Mining has also committed A$400 000 in funding between the New South Wales Rural Fire Service and the Victorian County Fire Authority, matching up to A$200 000 in employee donations. Commercial explosive provider Orica has also committed A$1-million between the Victorian Bushfire Appeal and the New South Wales Rural Fire Services, and will match employee donations to a range of bushfire charities. Dart Mining has converted a six-wheeler mine site water truck into a firefighting resource to protect the communities of Tindaldra and Wodonga, while the Minerals Council of Australia’s secretariat has donated A$20 000 to the Australian Red Cross disaster relief and recovery fund.