Since the 2008 energy crisis, mines have responded by implementing energy reduction tactics such as shifting loads to off-peak periods, switching to more efficient equipment and implementing better maintenance programmes. While mines are better prepared to operate on reduced power than they were during the 2008 crisis, the sweeping blackouts at the end of 2019 had a severe impact on the industry, prompting the Minerals Council South Africa to call on government to address regulatory constraints around self-generation. Energy efficiency consultancy Inframid MD Nick Oosthuizen says there is opportunity for mines to turn their energy liabilities into assets. “Mines have numerous loads that require various sources including utility, back-up supplies, renewable energy and seamless (UPS) changeover supplies. There must be a feasible combination of these energy sources to ensure that they are used efficiently; for example, by providing the most appropriate backup, viable renewable energy and UPS power where it is needed, without overcompensating. "Over-sizing UPS’s to provide backup, for example, is an expensive and inefficient use of stored energy which unnecessarily drives up costs. “A comprehensive analysis will show how different types of electrical loads can be satisfied and optimised in such a way that energy savings turn into bottom line profits. Instead of being a liability, these high loads can be transformed into assets,” explains Oosthuizen. He adds that analysing the total load will also reveal opportunities to save on costs by managing different loads optimally. Power factor correction, changing utility connections to the correct tariff scales and insertion of renewable energy are just some of the opportunities to drive efficiencies that are often overlooked. Oosthuizen says the detail of the total load must be interrogated before deciding on energy supplies or investing in energy efficiency technologies, including renewable and backup energy. It is only once you understand the loads, both day and night, that you can intelligently determine how your energy sources can be economically applied. “For example, you can supplement your ‘base load’ with solar power to provide renewable energy during the day, so that the energy sources that peak during day time can be brought down,” notes Oosthuizen, adding that mines normally have vast unused areas that can be used to develop renewable energy infrastructure to supply large-scale energy. He further states that the adoption of renewable energy sources in the mining sector has been low, mainly owing to the high costs of establishing it and storing the power that is generated. However, technologies have advanced and prices have started to drop, making renewable energy more attractive for mines. “A comprehensive feasibility study is where it should begin as this helps decision-makers to determine their energy efficiency concept, based on realistic and actual feasibleness. “This includes procuring high-quality systems independently from the best suppliers at reasonable prices. All cost elements must be considered, such as total lifecycle management. For equipment to be feasible and offer high returns on investment, it must work for at least 25 years,” Oosthuizen concludes.