The higher education landscape is evolving, a process that has been sped up as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, University of the Witwatersrand (Wits) Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment dean Professor Ian Jandrell said on December 9. Speaking on the second day of the Wits Mining Institute’s Innovation seminar, he pointed out that undergraduate programmes at all universities were transforming. Jandrell said there was a shift towards more flexibility, and transferability in skills. Jandrell said universities needed to drive the knowledge economy, which required a commitment to research, with a growing focus on a postgraduate qualification. However, he emphasised that universities must not lose sight of the need to continue to produce world-class engineering graduates. He emphasised that the necessary changes could not be effected by one university alone, but rather, required a collective, systematic higher education effort. Jandrell said the pandemic, while devastating, did have certain advantages, more specifically, showing that remote working and teaching could work, if implemented properly. He said this created an online option in parallel with face-to-face interaction, "which is a very powerful thing". Moreover, he said this had enabled a boot camp concept, with universities able to determine where students were falling behind in online work and offer additional sessions with strong tutor support to allow catch-up. Jandrell acclaimed that online learning also allowed students to transition from one qualification to another and from one institution to another. Moreover, he emphasised that it provided access beyond just the institution and the borders of one’s country. For example, he noted that, at Wits, the first year courses would, going forward, be available in parallel face-to-face and online modes, meaning that people who could not get access to university could undertake their first year online. He acclaimed that this provided opportunities not available before the pandemic. Jandrell emphasised that this was not about lowering standards, but rather, providing the best opportunities for education for students in the country.