PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Mining major Rio Tinto has appointed CFO Jakob Stausholm to take over the role as CEO from Jean-Sebastian Jacques on January 1, 2021. Jacques, along with iron-ore CEO Chris Salisbury, and group executive of corporate relations Simone Niven all handed in their resignations following the destruction of the Juukan Gorge rock shelters in the Pilbara earlier this year. Rio Tinto said that Stausholm wasan experienced global executive, with 25 years in leadership roles in capital intensive and service industries across Europe, Latin America and Asia-Pacific. Prior to joining Rio in 2018, he was group CFO and strategy and transformation officer of AP Moeller – Maersk A/S. “I am pleased to announce the appointment of Stausholm as CEO of Rio Tinto. His blend of strategic and commercial expertise, strong values and a collaborative leadership style are the ideal qualities for our next chief executive,” Rio Tinto chairperson Simon Thompson said. “Stausholm has already made a significant contribution to the performance of the group in his role as CFO. He has a proven track record as a senior executive with deep industrial and resources experience spanning strategy development and technology, as well as financial and risk management. He has also demonstrated the ability to build effective relationships and has a strong personal commitment to the role of business in promoting sustainable development.” Stausholm, for his part said, he would remain committed to Rio’s purpose to produce the materials essential to human progress. “I look forward to leading Rio Tinto and working with my colleagues across the business to ensure that we maintain strong safety, operational and financial performance, while progressing our growth, sustainability and technology strategies. I am also acutely aware of the need to restore trust with Traditional Owners and our other stakeholders, which I view as a key priority for the company.” Peter Cunningham would be appointed interim CFO of Rio Tinto, effective January 1. He was previously group controller for Rio Tinto and has held a number of senior finance and leadership roles across Rio Tinto in a career spanning 27 years with the company. Prior to joining Rio Tinto, he qualified as a chartered accountant. Given the effective date of Stausholm’s appointment, Jacques will step down from his role as an executive director and CEO of Rio Tinto with effect from January 1 and will leave the group on March 31.