PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Western Australia has hosted a roundtable with major German and Australian companies to explore hydrogen collaboration and partnership opportunities. Regional Development Minister Alannah MacTiernan hosted the roundtable, which featured representatives from major German and Australian businesses including ThyssenKrupp, Siemens, Daimler AG, Woodside, BHP, Yara Pilbara and Fortescue Metals Group. The meeting was the first of its kind for any Australian state since the Joint Declaration of Intent was signed between the Australian and German governments in September to deliver a hydrogen supply chain feasibility study. "Western Australia has an extraordinary opportunity to become a leader in the emerging renewable hydrogen industry and the government is on the front foot in taking advantage of this opportunity,” said MacTiernan.  "Germany currently imports up to 70% of its energy, and is eyeing renewable hydrogen for its future energy needs. We have undertaken significant work with the German government and industry over the past two years to lay the foundations for the state's now-burgeoning hydrogen industry.  "This is setting Western Australia apart as both a producer of hydrogen and as a key technology partner,” she said.  "This inaugural roundtable between Germany and Western Australia is an important next step in driving forward our local hydrogen industry and supporting global efforts to reduce carbon emissions."  The roundtable served as an introduction between German and Western Australian companies operating in the renewable hydrogen sector, and an opportunity to explore collaboration and partnerships opportunities.  Strengthening relationships with international renewable hydrogen importers has been a major focus for the Western Australian government, which has allocated A$1-million towards developing a detailed supply chain model to review potential bottlenecks and factors affecting the export industry, MacTiernan said.  Current global demand for hydrogen is at more than 70-million tonnes a year and the value of Australia's low-emissions hydrogen exports could reach A$2.2-billion by 2030 and A$5.7-billion by 2040.