PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Northern Territory government on Wednesday endorsed the Petroleum Regulations 2020, which are aimed at strengthening regulation and ensuring the industry is accountable for its practices, while assisting pastoralists and petroleum companies to reach land access agreements for petroleum activities, including the required protections. “The Northern Territory government is building a productive onshore petroleum industry that protects our unique environment and delivers local jobs and it is integral to ensure a robust and trusted regulatory framework is in place,” said Mining and Industry Minister Nicole Manison. “Strengthening regulation will ensure industry is accountable for its practices, water and the environment is safeguarded, community and culture is respected, the benefits and opportunities available to local businesses and communities is maximised, and to ensure planning for future. “Jobs are critical to Territorians, and a healthy exploration sector can play a key role in supporting our economy.” The regulations require statutory land access agreements to be reached for regulated operations and detailed notices to be issued prior to any airborne surveys and limited preliminary activities, and provide mechanisms to assist parties negotiate a statutory land access agreement including mediation or some other form of alternative dispute resolution. The regulations also clarify minimum protection requirements including the requirement for all statutory land access agreements to contain standard 24 minimum protections specified in the Inquiry, which include requirements such as closing gates, ensuring all petroleum company employees receive induction training, minimising disturbance to livestock, giving notice to landholders and managing weeds. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has welcomed the new land access regulations, saying the regulation was made in consultation with key stakeholders. “Evidence shows everyone benefits when explorers and pastoralists proactively engage around their activities, identify issues and work together to achieve sustainable solutions,” Appea Northern Territory director Keld Knudsen said. “Building and maintaining strong and positive relationships between the industry and other users of the land is essential, especially to ensure the long-term economic benefits of responsible resource development. “This is a long-term win for both industries, and for all Territorians, generating wider benefits including jobs and royalty revenue.” The Northern Territory Cattlemen’s Association (NTCA) also said that the new requirements lay the foundations for positive outcomes for pastoralists and petroleum explorers. “The regulations establish a minimum set of standards with which both parties need to negotiate access,” NTCA CEO Ashley Manicaros said. “From next year, a land access agreement will need to be in place before access to the land can occur. It is important for both sectors that relationships start the correct way and the regulations establish a framework for that to occur. “The cattle industry is worth A$1.2-billion and employs 10 000 people directly and indirectly. Each cattle station in the territory is a multimillion-dollar enterprise in their own right and as a consequence any disruption or risk has to be mitigated. These regulations create a mechanism to ensure this occurs.”