More than 6 000 people have registered for future job opportunities at emerging marine phosphate miner Namibian Marine Phosphate's (NMP's) Sandpiper project, in Namibia. NMP in October launched a job registration drive to enable it to compile a database of prospective job seekers who may be suitable for various full-time, part-time and casual job opportunities at the project. The Sandpiper project is expected to employ about 600 employees, directly and indirectly, during its construction and operation. The registration drive closed on November 30, with 6 058 registrants. NMP will, from March, hold workshops to provide registrants with details about the project's technical, environmental and development plans, as well as the related job opportunities. Registrants will, from February, start receiving invitations to the workshops. Hosting the workshops and receiving the outcome of a hearing held in Namibia in July into a review of the project's environmental authorisation are the two key developments NMP is focusing on for early 2021. NMP in July told Mining Weekly that it was confident that the judgment, which was expected to be delivered by March 2021, would be in NMP's favour, as the company remains committed to the responsible development of the Sandpiper project. COO Mike Woodborne says the company is keen to move forward with the project once it receives a favourable outcome. He also assures the public and stakeholders that, when appointing consultants to undertake technical and environmental studies, NMP ensures that it appoints the best possible partners that will give it the best advice. It also endeavours, as far as is possible, to make use of local expertise. Meanwhile, reflecting on the current phosphate market, CEO Chris Jordinson says that while phosphate prices have declined this year, these are on an upswing again. NMP is focused on supplying the direct application market, with big agricultural exporters such as India and Brazil the most likely buyers of its future product.