PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The resources sector has thanked Matt Canavan for his contribution to the industry, after he quit as federal Resources Minister to support Barnaby Joyce’s challenge for leadership of the National Party. The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) on Tuesday thanked Canavan for his services to the minerals industry, with CEO Tania Constable saying that he delivered untiring and passionate support for Australia’s minerals companies and workforce and regional communities as a Cabinet Minister in the federal government. “He worked closely with the MCA and our member companies to secure and maintain the growth and success of Australia’s resources industry to create new jobs, strengthen regional communities and drive economic growth. “In particular, mineworkers from pits to ports across the country appreciated Senator Canavan’s staunch support for their jobs and industry,” Constable said. “The next Minister for Resources and Northern Australia will have big shoes to fill as they build on Senator Canavan’s passionate advocacy for the development of Australia through a globally competitive and sustainable minerals sector.” The Queensland Resources Council also thanked Canavan for his "unrelenting support" of the resources sector, with CEO Ian Macfarlane noting that his decision to step down from the role would be a loss for the sector. “Matt Canavan has been a passionate and unrelenting advocate of the resources sector. In particular, he has recognised how important the resources sector is to create jobs for regional Queenslanders and to support regional communities. “Canavan is well known for his support of Queensland’s powerhouse commodities of coal and gas which provide energy to Australia and the world, as well as providing the building blocks for everything from modern cities to mobile phones. “But Matt has also been just as passionate about the new opportunities in critical minerals and expanding markets, which will consolidate Queensland and Australia’s role as a resources superpower,” Macfarlane said.