Diversified gold and silver producer McEwen Mining has recorded further positive drill results at the Whiskey Jack target in the Grey Fox area, which is part of the Black Fox Complex in the prolific Timmins gold district, in Canada. “New intersections at Whiskey Jack have confirmed high‑grade gold mineralisation over significant true widths, including 53 g/t gold over 6.7 m. This intersection is open and offers good potential for the discovery of a new high-grade deposit that could contribute to the growth of our existing resource at Grey Fox,” says McEwen Exploration senior VP Sylvain Guerard. The Whiskey Jack target is located on the northern extension of the Grey Fox mineralised system, where the contact between sedimentary and volcanic units changes orientation, from a steep dip to the east to a moderate dip to the southwest. Mineralisation at Whiskey Jack is known to have complex geometry, but recent drilling has better defined the important geologic controls, McEwen reports. Hole 19GF-1293 was drilled to assess the true width of an earlier 9 g/t gold over 44 m core length intersection released on December 3, 2019, which was believed to have been drilled at a low angle to the mineralised structure, and is now interpreted to have a true width of 4.9 m. Results from hole #1293 returned two sub-parallel intersections of 5.8 g/t gold over 4 m and 53 g/t gold over 6.7 m, confirming the initial interpretation and the consistency of the broad high-grade mineralisation in this system. Gold intersections within the Whiskey Jack structure extend 200 m along strike and have been intersected from near surface to a vertical depth of about 400 m. Drill results suggest the gold mineralisation may be hosted in at least two sub-parallel structures, spaced about 11 m apart, containing mineralised veins and breccias, with true thickness ranging from about 2 m to 6 m. Intense silica, albite and disseminated pyrite is associated to the gold mineralisation. The mineralised structure remains open and offers potential for expansion.