OTTAWA - Canada is preparing an aid package for Alberta, heart of the country's struggling oil industry, that would help dull the pain if it blocks an oil sands project that could create thousands of jobs, sources familiar with the matter said this week. Ottawa must decide by the end of this month if Teck Resources can build the C$20.6-billion Frontier mine in northern Alberta despite climate and wildlife concerns. The decision is a major test of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's 2019 election pledge to put Canada on the path to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Complicating the decision, unhappiness with the government's energy and pipeline policy cost Trudeau's Liberals all their Alberta seats in October 2019 elections. "There will be a big fight inside cabinet over this," said one source directly familiar the matter who requested anonymity given the sensitivity of the situation. "Rejecting Teck without providing Alberta something in return would be political suicide," the source added. In Alberta, the project is considered essential for employment and growth. Teck says it would eventually create 7 000 jobs, although the company's chief executive recently questioned whether it will ever be built. Rejecting the project would be "a devastating signal for investors looking at Canada", a spokesman for Alberta’s energy minister said. About 20 oil sands projects currently sit dormant despite receiving approval. Options being considered in the provincial aid package, to be featured in the upcoming budget, include a cash injection to help clean up thousands of inactive oil and gas wells abandoned by bankrupt companies, five sources with knowledge of the situation said. The move would help create jobs. But it would also require Alberta's government "to close the loopholes" that have allowed companies to shed their responsibilities for the clean-up, one of the sources said. Also under discussion is expanding the federal fiscal stabilization program that helps provinces deal with economic downturns, a measure Alberta's Premier Jason Kenney has demanded. Local infrastructure projects could also be in the mix, the source said. All five sources said that while Trudeau was particularly concerned about national unity, given strains with Alberta, he has not made his position known. Both Deputy Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland, who has the job of repairing relations with the province, and Natural Resources Minister Seamus O'Regan are widely believed to be tilting towards approving the project, while many other cabinet members remain undecided. Freeland's office did not respond to requests for comment. A spokesman for O'Regan declined to say how the minister felt about the project. "This is a cabinet decision that will be taken in due course," Trudeau spokesman Cameron Ahmad said when asked about the internal debate.