PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Australian resources sector has welcomed the appointment of Keith Pitt as the new federal Minister for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, following the resignation of Matt Canavan earlier this week. Minerals Council of Australia CEO Tania Constable on Thursday said that the industry body would work closely with Pitt to maintain the growth and success of the resources industry. “Pitt has been a strong advocate for the resources industry and the benefits it delivers regional communities like his. Representing regional Queensland as the Member for Hinkler, he’s lived and breathed our industry and is proud of it. He will bring passion and experience to this role,” Constable said. “The Australian minerals industry faces challenges including building the future minerals workforce through better delivery of training and education, reducing regulation and red tape for faster project approvals and more jobs, and creating stronger regional communities through sustainable and responsible minerals development. “There are also immense opportunities from the growing global demand for steel, energy and critical minerals. Australia’s minerals industry can supply the resources to meet this demand with an unwavering commitment to sustainability, community engagement, rehabilitation and greenhouse gas reduction.” Queensland Resources Council (QRC) CEO Ian Macfarlane has also welcomed the appointment of the new Minister, saying it was good news for the resources sector to see another Queenslander taking on the portfolio. “Pitt has a reputation for straight-talking and as a regional Queenslander he knows first-hand about the importance of the resources sector to create jobs and investment in regional communities. “He also has a strong understanding of the policy issues that relate to the resources sector, in particular the need for affordable and reliable energy,” Macfarlane said. “QRC looks forward to the new Minister building on the substantial policy work of his predecessor, especially in the area of maintaining Queensland’s role as a resources powerhouse through our coal, gas and minerals sectors.” The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association said that Pitt inherited a strong legacy from Canavan’s stewardship of the resources portfolio over his nearly four years in the role, with the industry body looking forward to ongoing policy consistency. “We look forward to continuing the constructive dialogue and engagement with Minister Pitt that we have had with previous resources ministers, including Senator Canavan, and that he can continue the good work undertaken by the government in this important portfolio,” said CEO Andrew McConville.