Business for South Africa (B4SA) has called for swift amendments to those Covid-19 level 4 lockdown regulations that President Cyril Ramaphosa has acknowledged to be unclear and contradictory and has again called for preparations to be accelerated for an orderly and rapid transition through levels 3 and 2 to allow for the resumption of maximum economic activity. In a statement released following Ramaphosa’s May 13 address, B4SA welcomed the indication given in the speech that government intended progressively easing the lockdown and reopening the economy further. Ramaphosa said a process of stakeholder consultation would begin immediately on a proposal to transition most of the country to level 3 by the end of May. He cautioned, however, that those parts of the country with the highest rates of infection, mostly South Africa’s large cities, might have to remain on level 4. “We will make further announcements after the completion of the consultations. In the coming days, we will also be announcing certain changes to level 4 regulations to expand permitted business activities in the retail space and e-commerce and reduce restrictions on exercise,” the President said, acknowledging that mistakes had been made. B4SA’s Martin Kingston said in a statement that business was supportive of the risk-adjusted approached adopted for lockdown easing, but that it was continuing to engage with government to reiterate the call for the swift easing of economic restrictions. He acknowledged, too, that any easing would have to be accompanied by stringent health and hygiene measures in the workplace, as well as across public transport, public services and public spaces. “We welcome the President’s view that, however well intentioned, some regulations are inappropriate, or misaligned, to the risk-adjusted standard. “We urge the swift amendment of these regulations, incorporating evidence-based input from business, to allow for maximum economic activity so that more goods and services can be produced commensurate with hygiene, as well as health and safety protocols. “We urge that the economy prepare for an orderly, clear and swift transition through levels 3 and 2 to a functioning economy,” the B4SA statement read. Coinciding with the release of the statement, Trade, Industry and Competition Minister Ebrahim Patel published an amendment to the level 4 regulations, easing e-commerce restriction, which had been widely criticised as being irrational. The Gazette notice outlined which goods could be purchased through e-commerce platforms and the protocols that should be observed by retailers, couriers and customers in respect of goods bought through such platforms. Patel said in a statement that e-commerce has great potential as a safe retail platform during the pandemic. "We need to work together with the sector to make digital platforms an avenue which can be used by a greater number of local manufacturers, retailers and consumers to transact. We have consulted with companies in e-commerce who have committed to give prominence to South African-made goods on their sites," Patel said.  