PERTH (miningweekly.com) – Mining major Rio Tinto is bracing for a changed market environment post Covid-19. CEO Jean Sebastian-Jacques told delegates on the Bank of America Global Metals, Mining and Steel Conference that the mining industry would need to transform to operate and thrive in a post pandemic reality. “As we look to the future, it is fair to say that we do not know what the world will look like. But it is absolutely clear that things have got a lot more complex,” Sebastian-Jacques said, pointing to the global travel restrictions and the significant rate of unemployment rate currently experienced. “The movement of people and goods will be restricted. As will the movement of data and it is likely that wealth distribution will fundamentally shift. So, significant uncertainties will exist over the short-, medium-, and potentially long-term. Sebastian-Jacques noted that different countries were also in different phases of the pandemic, resulting in a lack of coordination and the emergence of a ‘realpolitik world’, with the potential for rising nationalism and increased geopolitical tensions, like the US/China relationship, as well as trade dislocations. He noted that economic recovery post pandemic would be dependent on a number of factors, including how society chose to respond, the effectiveness of the health measures in place, and the effectiveness off economic stimulus. “It is clear that regardless of the shape of the recovery, the world will see slower gross domestic product growth, and trade impacts. Both key drivers of the mining industry.” However, Sebastian-Jacques noted that alongside the challenges, there were also opportunities. “We are now, more than ever, focused on understanding and managing our critical risks. We do also see the potential for new opportunities to emerge. As history has show, great innovation often springs from difficult times. To make the most of these, we will enhance our resilience, strengthen our partnerships and continue to adapt, all with an aim to maintain our strong performance.” “You have heard me say before that mining developments of the future may start smaller and be embedded with optionality for growth over stages, yielding quick cash flows to shareholders, communities and governments. “Such as our Winu project, in Western Australia. In the post Covid world, this type of development approach may become more viable.” Sebastian-Jacques noted that Rio would remain patient in terms of its investment decisions, and would only make these based on market fundamentals. “We know that adaption is also thinking about our future portfolio. We are keeping a watching brief on merger and acquisitions. Right now, the market is funding it difficult to value companies and the Covid-19 recovery pathway is not clear. “Rio Tinto will only transact if an opportunity creates value. We remain patient, but not complacent,” he added.