Diversified mining company Rio Tinto is investing $10-million in a variety of grassroots projects across Canada and the US to support local community efforts to fight Covid-19. The group’s investment is targeted at practical solutions like funding the food banks or counselling and support services that are helping frontline response workers and the communities around its operations, says CEO Jean-Sebastien Jacques. “We will also play our part in supporting and stimulating current and future economic activity through regional development initiatives that are vital for local jobs and businesses.” Some of the early initiatives Rio Tinto is contributing to include masks and other equipment worth C$100 000 to the local health authority in Quebec, where it owns aluminium operations in Saguenay – Lac-St-Jean. The aluminium business also provided C$75 000 to the startup Entreprise Prémont to help add a new production line to address the shortage of surgical masks in Canada. Rio Tinto is producing hand sanitizer in order to free up supplies for its communities. Through the company’s employee donation matching initiative, C$100 000 has been provided to four local food banks in Havre-St-Pierre and Sorel-Tracy. In British Columbia, the BC Works aluminium smelter made a C$50 000 contribution to the Kitimat General Hospital Foundation and provided reusable masks and safety glasses to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. In the Northwest Territories, the Diavik diamond mine is contributing C$60 000 to five Indigenous communities for community identified relief initiatives such as food hampers and on the land activities. In Labrador, IOC has provided alternative housing support to a local shelter for use if women and children affected by Covid-19 need a secure refuge. In Arizona, in the US, Rio Tinto’s Resolution copper project partnered with the United Food Bank to deliver 75 000 meals to the White Mountain Apache Tribe on the Fort Apache Reservation and is also donating 50 000 cans of water to support tribes in collaboration with Ball Corp and Can’d Aid. In California, our borax business donated $10 000 to offer learning support and food assistance to families living near our Wilmington facility at the Port of Los Angeles. Rio Tinto’s Boron operation is also producing hand sanitizer in order to free up supplies for the company's communities. In Utah, Rio Tinto’s Kennecott copper operation is partnering with the Natural History Museum to run a digital education hub pilot to improve access to technology for students. Kennecott is also producing hand sanitizer in order to free up supplies for its communities.