In its continued efforts to defeat Covid-19, mineral sands producer Richards Bay Minerals (RBM) is issuing its permanent employees, contract workers and their immediate families with cloth masks. Employees are also being issued with personal thermometers to monitor their body temperature. Since the country went into high alert more than a month ago, RBM has undertaken a series of measures against Covid-19 in its operations and is working with other businesses and industry bodies to support government’s efforts to combat the spread of the virus in the communities in which it operates. RBM has already provided necessary hygiene products, including 2 850 bottles of hand sanitisers, 12 000 surgical gloves (120 boxes) and 1 200 N95-standard masks to health centres and communities within the King Cetshwayo district municipality. “Safety is our foremost priority and we are proud to play a small part in keeping our community safe. We have created a specific Covid-19 community support plan to ensure the wellbeing of our people. “Our employees are our most valued asset and we will leave no stone unturned to ensure they are fighting fit and healthy during this period of great uncertainty,” says RBM MD Werner Duvenhage. “We will continue to work with the wider business community in Richards Bay and the district health authorities to help fight this crisis and create sustainable growth in our communities,” he adds. Meanwhile, in an effort to prevent the spread of Covid-19 in the workplace, RBM has created isolation rooms to prevent possibly infected workers from making contact with other team members. "The isolation rooms will ensure affected employees are kept as comfortable as possible and are separated from other team members while awaiting transfer to a healthcare facility.” Duvenhage says the isolation rooms are not for the use of the community as they are within the operational premises of the company. He adds that the company has also maintained the operation of its on-site medical clinic.