JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Mineral Resources and Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe on Sunday convened an urgent meeting with the Limpopo Provincial Government, led by Premier Stanley Mathabatha, and Impala Platinum (Implats) CEO Nico Muller. Mining Weekly can report that the meeting followed confirmation of a cluster of Covid-19 cases being detedted in and around Implats' Marula platinum mine in Limpopo. Nineteen cases were detected following stringent and comprehensive screening, testing and tracing protocols. Significantly, 17 of the confirmed cases reside locally, suggesting the prevalence of Covid-19 among local communities is far higher than the company’s initial estimates had indicated. Following the meeting of the Minister, premier and Implats CEO in Bela-Bela, a town in Limpopo province, Mantashe stated in a tweeted video that what had been agreed was the intensification of testing, paricularly of people coming in from Covid epicentres. What was important about the infected mineworkers at Marula was that they had not gone underground but were screened, tested and discovered before going underground, and were now quarantined. It was agreed with the Limpopo province that when people came in from the epicentres of the coronavirus, they would be quarantined. “It’s not a nice to have. It may sound painful, but it protects the workers, it protects the community, and it protects the industry,” Mantashe emphasised on the video, which depicted everyone masked and physically distanced. “This is what we’re going to do. For example, the Eastern Cape is an epicentre. You will have to quarantine people coming in from the Eastern Cape. If they come from Gauteng, you have to quarantine them. If they’re from the Western Cape, you have an epicentre, and you have to quarantine. Up to yesterday, 157 cases in the Eastern Cape had migrated from the Western Cape, and therefore quarantining for epicentres makes sense,” the Minister stressed. The Covid detections at Marula were, he said, not something small and would have spread had the workers gone underground. JSE-listed Implats said on Saturday that it had temporarily suspended operations at the Marula mine, located 35 km north-west of the town of Burgersfort. Mining Weekly can point out that the Marula mines shares boundaries with several other platinum mines. These include Modikwa, Tjate and Twickenham, all on the eastern limb of the Bushveld Complex. In the 2018 financial year, Marula produced 85 100 oz of platinum in concentrate. The operation comprises two decline shafts and a concentrator plant. Current mining activities target the upper group two reef. Black economic empowerment partners, the Marula Community Trust, Tubatse Platinum and Mmakau Mining, each own 9% of Marula, in which Implats has the main 73% shareholding. Marula put in an improved mining performance in the three months to March 31, but Implats cautioned in in a media release the next month that unplanned interruptions were likely to be a regular feature of the remaining months of its 2020 financial year to June 30, and that the impact of Covid-19 would likely be a feature for some time and operating in a ‘business as usual’ environment would not be possible until effective prevention and treatment measures became readily available. Implats stated that rigorous screening and testing protocols at Marula had proved effective in quickly identifying cases, enabling the group to isolate affected employees rapidly to prevent wider infection on the mine. It was also confirmed that these cases included a local health provider and four mine-employed health providers working at the mine clinic. This facility was immediately closed for sterilisation and testing of medical staff and all primary contacts. Every person who tested positive was immediately isolated to prevent the further spread of the virus and has been isolated at the mine’s isolation site, at government designated facilities or at home as per government protocols. Department of Health officials visited patients at the quarantine site on Saturday, May 16.