JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Precious metals mining company Sibanye-Stillwater on Tuesday announced the logistical arrangements for an electronically conducted annual generation meeting (AGM) later this month. The Johannesburg- and New York-listed company, headed by CEO Neal Froneman, provided detailed steps for shareholders to follow at the AGM, which will be held entirely electronically on May 26. Holding the AGM remotely is a consequence of Covid-19’s physical distancing imperatives, which have been followed by many listed stock exchange companies, which have opted for various forms of electronic AGM participation in recent months. In the case of Sibanye-Stillwater, shareholders have been instructed by a Stock Exchange News Service notice, which forms the basis of this Mining Weekly report, to take laid-down participation steps. These begin by placing the Internet link provided into the Internet browser, opting to take part on the Web or by using Microsoft Teams, joining the proceedings and muting microphones. Shareholders wishing to participate in the AGM electronically have been requested to email their intent by no later than 09h00 on May 22. For their emailed electronic notice to be valid, it must contain a list of records that include identity documents, resolutions, and contact details, with permission granted for the personal data to be used for the AGM. Sibanye-Stillwater stated that those not meeting the May 22 deadline would be required to email their electronic notice by 08h30 on May 26. Sibanye-Stillwater stated that the electronic communication used would enable participants to communicate concurrently with one another without an intermediary as well as vote their shares, which would be possible via electronic communication. The link, username and password needed to access the platform would be provided. Those logged in would be able to vote and ask questions during the meeting. Sibanye-Stillwater has six platinum group metals mines, five of them in South Africa and one in the US, and six gold mines, all of them in South Africa.