The Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) on May 11 published a guideline for public comment, which involves the compilation of a mandatory code of practice for the mitigation and management of Covid-19 in the mining sector. The department in a statement confirmed that this was in compliance with the outcome of a recent Labour Court process, as well as the efforts of the department to ensure the spread of the virus is contained. The closing date for public comments is May 14. The DMRE requires that an employer must prepare and implement a code of practice (COP) on Covid-19, which must comply with relevant regulations in the Disaster Management Act. The objective of the guideline published for public comment is to assist employers to establish and maintain a Covid-19 mitigation and management programme at mines, which will assist in ensuring the health and safety of employees. The employer will be required to apply the department’s guideline as a minimum guiding principle in its guideline in preventing and managing Covid-19 transmission. Firstly, the DMRE suggests that the employer must consult with the health and safety committee and any other affected parties on the preparation, implementation and revision of any COP, following which a committee must be appointed for the drafting of the COP. The COP must contain, at least, a description of the mine and its location, the commodities produced, the mining method used, including its potential risk of exposure to Covid-19 and possible exposure scenarios, the general controls in place to prevent exposure to Covid-19 and unique features of the mine that have a bearing on the COP and cross-reference them to a risk assessment, which is required to be conducted as well. The risk assessment is aligned with what Section 11 of the Mine Health and Safety Act requires anyway, which is that employers identify hazards and assess the health risks to which employees may be exposed to while they are at work. The employer must determine how the significant risks identified in the risk assessment process must be dealt with. As far as reasonably practicable, attempts must first be made to eliminate the risk, thereafter to control the risk at source, thereafter to minimise the risk and thereafter, insofar as the risk remains, to provide personal protective equipment and to institute a programme to monitor the risk. The department summarises the key elements to be addressed in the COP as risk assessment and review; startup and ongoing procedure for mines; Covid-19 management programme; monitoring and reporting; and compensation of occupationally-acquired Covid-19. The DMRE also suggests that the COP be reviewed periodically and adjusted after every serious incident. “In implementing any solution driven measure, the employer must aim to apply the best available evidence gained from scientific methods for decision-making in preventing Covid-19 exposure.” The DMRE further recommends that the mine’s COP must include a dedicated 24-hour number that employees may use to reach the mine’s dedicated healthcare workers contracted to assist with Covid-19. Meanwhile, the employer must have a startup procedure in place to address disinfection of any transport entering the mine, change houses, lamp rooms, waiting areas, refuge bays, offices, medical stations, kitchen areas, mine accommodation and guard houses. The startup procedure must also include screening and testing protocols, and withdrawal protocols to be used in the event of a localised Covid-19 outbreak as well as stipulate the measures that are in place to collaborate with the Department of Health on the prevention management of Covid-19 for migrant workers and port of entries. Employees also need to be classified according to their level of risk, not only according to where they could have been in contact with people testing positive for Covid-19, but also in terms of their age and chronic diseases, as well as where they work on site. The DMRE further outlines guidelines in terms of monitoring and reporting, as well as follow-up systems.