PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Queensland government has made more than 6 700 km2 of land available for gas exploration and a new explorer looking to supply Australian-only gas users. Mines Minister Dr Anthony Lynham today announced 12 prospective parcels of land were now open to tender across Queensland’s resource-rich Bowen and Surat basins between Blackwater and Goondiwindi. “This is about keeping exploration moving in Queensland to support our post Covid-19 economic recovery. Queensland has been the leader in getting gas to Australian users, including our manufacturers, to fuel jobs. “More affordable domestic gas supply will help secure more Aussie jobs across the supply chain—from the well head to the manufacturing plant.” Queensland Regional Development and Manufacturing Minister Glenn Butcher said 872 km2 of the land could only supply gas to the Australian market, which was good news for manufacturers and jobs. “Gas is critical to our manufacturers as a feedstock as well as an energy source to fuel jobs,” he said. “Already we have Senex Energy producing critical gas feedstock and energy, including to businesses like Orica at Yarwun. As well, Australian Pacific liquefied natural gas (LNG) and Armour Energy’s joint venture project near Chinchilla is set to supply gas next year to help secure around 650 manufacturing jobs in plants across Queensland.” Lynham said the land was in proven highly prospective regions that are already pumping gas as part of Queensland’s A$70-billion onshore gas industry. “I expect strong interest as the Surat and Bowen basins already have gas infrastructure and any new project could plug straight in and get gas to market faster,” he said. The Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association (Appea) has welcomed the new land release, with CEO Andrew McCoville saying Queensland has led the development of onshore gasfields for decades and continues to do the heavy lifting to meet Australia’s growing needs. “Queensland should be congratulated for continuing to see the economic benefits that flow to their communities from developing and using natural gas, especially in these challenging times,” McConville said. Applications for the new land release will be open until July 9.