PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Western Australian government has unveiled new procedures to support the resources sector during the Covid-19 pandemic, with a key focus of transitioning to online services. Mines and Petroleum Minister Bill Johnston said that the resulting changes and new or revised guidelines would ensure continuity of service for important functions involving industry. A key focus is encouraging stakeholders to use Department of Mines, Industry, Regulation and Safety's (DMIRS’s) online services rather than lodging physical documents. For example, DMIRS will accept electronic signatures on documents, which are not required to be witnessed or sworn, and other tenement-related documents will be emailed where possible. "The streamlining of these administrative procedures is another example of the McGowan Government and industry working together to identify opportunities to better support them during this challenging time. "The mining sector has been cooperative and compliant in response to the measures the government has put in place to slow the spread of Covid-19,” Johnson said. "Maintaining a strong resources sector will be critical in ensuring our state and the wider Australian economy are well-positioned to bounce back when the global economy recovers from this pandemic." The Western Australian Chamber of Minerals and Energy has welcomed the move, with CEO Paul Everingham saying it was a win for common sense, particularly during the pandemic. “Now that DMIRS is moving to expand the use of electronic approaches, Western Australian resources companies can now carry out their administrative business with the Department in a safer, more efficient manner, including lodging applications linked to tenement applications and other approvals,” he added. Everingham said there had been widespread recognition from the state and federal governments that the Western Australian resources sector had played an integral role in keeping the Australian economy afloat during the coronavirus pandemic, therefore it was essential that government regulations and procedures didn’t prohibit or stifle mining operations.