TSX-listed exploration and development company African Gold Group reports its definitive feasibility study (DFS) on an expanded throughput scenario on a process plant at the Kobada gold project in southern Mali, has been completed, suggesting the process plant could be ramped up to exceed the DFS target of 100 000 oz/y. Mineral processing project management and engineering firm SENET conducted the DFS for the plant, which is a three-million-ton-a-month run-of-mine feed, combined with a gravity circuit and a carbon-in-leach (CIL) section. The DFS highlights that the process plant is flexible and can exceed throughput of 100 000 oz/y. The plant is simplified and uses a compact process plant flowsheet which reduces the requirement for expensive and long-lead process equipment. It also possesses low hardness and abrasiveness characteristics of ore, resulting in a low overall power demand and reduced wear on liners and mill media. Its low deleterious elements result in low reagent use and low operating cost. The positive result of the metallurgical testwork has enabled SENET to design a plant offering the flexibility required to effectively treat all ore types from the Kobada gold project. The simplified flowsheet is expected to also reduce the construction schedule from 22 months to 18 months. In addition, overall power consumption is expected to be low given the soft nature of the ore at Kobada. African Gold Group COO Danny Callow says that the company’s flexible and robust oxide processing plant requires low power and uses proven technology able to treat its blend of saprolites and laterites. “Our gravity and CIL process provides a 96% recovery of gold with low reagent consumption and low power requirement. All of these components contribute to a low all-in sustaining cost and competitive capital cost.” He notes that, at current gold prices, African Gold Group is keen to advance this project to construction as soon as possible. “We have focused all of our energy on reducing the construction schedule from 22 months to 18 months, and identifying suppliers who are experienced in project delivery in West Africa.”