ASX- and LSE-listed potash company Danakali has appointed Dr Rod McEachern as COO, effective December 3. According to the company, his appointment strengthens and deepens Danakali’s potash mining and processing knowledge and leadership capability. McEachern, who has a PhD in physical chemistry from the University of Saskatchewan, will be responsible for the design and set-up of the operation readiness including safe and sustainable mining and processing operations for Colluli Mining Share Company (CMSC). Danakali says in a statement that McEachern’s significant potash experience, which is specifically related to mining, production, harvesting, process engineering, logistics, environmental compliance, and safety, are clear standout attributes. In the two decades prior to joining Danakali, McEachern held senior management roles as crop input company Nutrien process and product innovation director, and a number of senior roles with PotashCorp as senior director for Innovation and GM at the Allan facility. McEachern was seconded to Arab Potash as operations VP in Amman, Jordan. In this role, he was responsible for all aspects of the potash facility including safe mill and solar pond production, transportation and logistics, innovation, automation, new product development, and environmental management. Danakali CEO Niels Wage says the appointment comes at an opportune time as the company advances the project development into Phase 3. “There are few people in the world with the unique potash experience that [McEachern] brings and I believe his well-established industry experience, technological competencies and long commitment to the industry sector will be very valuable for Danakali as we advance the development of Colluli.” McEachern says he is particularly drawn to Colluli owing to the large, long life nature and high quality of the project. “Being part of a team responsible for delivering sustainable financial, social and economic returns to our shareholders and stakeholders in Eritrea is highly attractive.”