PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has refuted claims by Western Australia senator Pat Dodson, who accused diversified miner Rio Tinto of "incremental genocide" during a Parliamentary Inquiry into the destruction of the Juukan Gorge caves. Speaking at the Inquiry, Dodson was quoted by the ABC as saying that; “the lack of free prior and informed consent, the forcing of people into contracting out their rights, the management of culture that ties traditional owners and takes advantage of weak laws … this is a form of incremental genocide. "And the destruction of sites, which is the evidentiary base of the oldest living culture in this country … as an international company, do you have any recollection that this is what you currently have been participating in?" Rio CEO Jean-Sebastian Jacques has previously apologized for the destruction of the 46 000-year-old caves, and recently said that the company was focused on regaining the trust of the Puutu Kunti Kurrama and Pinikura people (PKKP) with a focus on remedy. Jacques, along with Rio’s iron-ore CEO Chris Salisbury and group executive of corporate relations Simone Niven, have all handed in their resignations following the destruction of the 46 000-year-old rockshelters in the Pilbara earlier this year. The MCA on Monday said that it recognised the distress caused to the PKKP by the destruction of the Juukan Gorge caves and the effect on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and the broader Australian community. “The MCA is deeply sorry,” the industry body’s CEO Tania Constable said. “For more than two decades, Australia’s minerals industry has worked to build strong and enduring relationships with the Traditional Owners on the lands on which it operates. The industry remains committed to these relationships. “The MCA is paying close attention to the work of the committee and appreciates its important, diligent and thoughtful inquiry. “The industry will use the lessons from the committee’s findings and draw on advice from Traditional Owners, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations,” she added.