TSX- and Aim-listed Atalaya Mining has started with a feasibility study on its Proyecto Riotinto site, in Spain, to evaluate the economic viability of producing cathodes from complex sulphide ores prevalent in the Iberian pyrite belt. This will be done through the application of a new extraction process called the E-Lix System, the effectiveness of which had been tested with a pilot plant at the Proyecto Riotinto site. The production of cathodes has the potential to generate cost savings by reducing charges for the company associated with concentrate transportation, treatment, refining and penalty elements, while simultaneously reducing carbon emissions. E-Lix is a newly developed electrochemical extraction process developed and owned by Lain Technologies, which is led by Dr Eva Lain − an electrochemistry expert from the University of Cambridge. The system was patented in 2014 by Lain, with help from Atalaya from an initial concept in a laboratory to a fully operational pilot plant at Proyecto Riotinto. Through the application of singular catalysts and physicochemical conditions, the system is able to achieve high metal recoveries under low residence times, by accomplishing rapid reaction rates, while overcoming classic surface passivation issues that have typically impaired metal recovery from complex sulphide ores. The E-Lix system is considered to be a more environment-friendly process than existing technologies; it is a zero-emissions process that does not consume water or acid and runs under mild operating conditions – atmospheric pressure and room temperature. Hence, the process is additionally characterised by ease and safety of operation. The pilot plant, with its 5 t/d capacity has been running at Proyecto Riotinto for the last nine months, with only mandatory stoppages during Covid-19 restrictions in Spain. Atalaya had achieved leach rates of up to 250 kg/h for copper concentrates, zinc concentrates and blends of different types of sulphides. The pilot plant also contains a solvent extraction and electrowinning section and has successfully produced high-purity copper cathodes as a proof of concept. Atalaya affirms that the pilot plant has demonstrated that the E-Lix system effectively treats the impurity levels that are typically associated with the complex sulphides present in the pyrite belt that runs through the south of Portugal and Spain. During the past five years, Atalaya provided financial assistance to Lain Tech to develop such a system. The parties have now reached agreement that Atalaya may use Lain Tech’s patents on an exclusive licence basis within the Iberian pyrite belt, while the profits of production will be shared eventually between the parties. The company has now commissioned a feasibility study to evaluate the construction of an industrial scale plant to produce at least 10 000 t/y of copper cathode metal. The €1-million feasibility study is expected to be finalised during 2021. The feasibility study will be based on the results obtained from the pilot plant and aims to confirm the scalability of the E-Lix system and the capital and operating costs of the industrial plant. Should the industrial plant be built, it will be funded and constructed by Atalaya with Lain Tech designing, operating and managing the system. Atalaya believes the use of the E-Lix system could potentially be applicable to the large amount of complex sulphide ore inventory present throughout the Iberian pyrite belt, including Atalaya's Proyecto Masa Valverde site.