Mineral Resources and Energy Minister Gwede Mantashe has gazetted amendments to the electricity regulations for new electricity generation capacity, opening the way for “municipalities in good financial standing to develop their own power generation projects”. The Gazette notice amends the Electricity Regulations on New Generation Capacity in terms of Section 35(4) of the Electricity Regulation Act (ERA), of 2006, and has been published a day after President Cyril Ramaphosa released government’s Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, which lists the rapid expansion of energy generation capacity as a top priority. In a speech to Parliament, Ramaphosa said steps would be taken to enable power generation for own-use, but he did not specifically comment on whether municipalities would be freed up to build capacity, or procure electricity from independent power producers (IPPs). The City of Cape Town took the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy (DMRE) and the National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa) to court recently, after Nersa informed the city that it could not license an IPP to establish new generation capacity in the absence of a specific determination from the Mineral Resources and Energy Minister catering for such capacity. On August 15, Judge Leonie Windell referred the dispute back to the parties for resolution in terms of Section 41(3) of the Constitution, which  requires all spheres of government to strive to adhere to the principle of cooperative governance, and Section 41 of the Intergovernmental Relations Frameworks Act, 2005. Windell left the way open, however, for any party to return to the court to seek further relief in the event that the dispute was not resolved through engagement or a possible dispute-resolution process. In a statement released on October 16, the DMRE asserted that the amendments to the regulations clarified the regime applicable to municipalities when requesting determinations under Section 34 of the ERA. It added that an internal standard operating procedure had been put in place at the department to ensure that requests for Section 34 determinations were “attended to in the shortest possible time”. The amendments extend the procurement of new renewables, cogeneration, baseload, mid-merit, peak load, energy storage and cross-border generation capacity to organs of State “active in the energy sector”, which includes municipalities. A municipality must, however, apply to the Minister to procure or buy new generation capacity in accordance with the Integrated Resource Plan (IRP), as well as the municipality’s own Integrated Development Plan (IDP). A feasibility study must also be submitted in instances where a project is being funded internally, while a municipality must submit proof that it has complied with the provisions of Section 120 of the Municipal Finance Management Act and the Municipal Public-Private Partnership Regulations in those instances where the electricity is being procured from an IPP. “This will ensure an orderly development that is in line with the applicable IRP and municipal IDPs. Furthermore, the amendments will ensure that Section 34 determination requests are from municipalities that are in good financial standing with feasible project proposals,” the DMRE said in a statement.