PERTH (miningweekly.com) – The Minerals Council of Australia (MCA) has welcomed an additional A$1.2-billion investment by the federal government to support the employment of 100 000 new apprentices or trainees as part of its Covid-19 economic recovery plan. From October 5, businesses which take on a new Australian apprentice would be eligible for a 50% wage subsidy, regardless of geographic location, occupation, industry or business size, until the 100 000 cap is reached. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said apprenticeships are an important pathway to get young people into jobs and to ensure there is a skills pipeline to meet the future needs of employers. “During this pandemic the federal government has been focused on supporting and creating jobs as well as identifying the skills we need in the economic rebuild. “Already 760 000 jobs that were either lost or reduced to zero hours as the Covid crisis hit have come back into our economy. We want to continue to recover what has been lost and get young people into work. “Whether it’s the manufacturing, housing and construction, arts or mining sectors - this new wage subsidy gives businesses certainty to hire and provides a career path to aspiring, young tradies,” Morrison said. Minister for Employment, Skills, Small and Family Business Michaelia Cash said the measure builds on the existing A$2.8-billion Supporting Apprentices and Trainees wage subsidy that is helping employers to retain their apprentices and trainees. “The Australian government has already invested significantly to ensure that apprentices are retained where possible and supported to re-engage if they lose their job,” Cash said. MCA CEO Tania Constable said that the subsidy would go a long way in helping companies employ young Australians seeking a career in apprenticeships and trades providing a pipeline of qualified skilled staff well into the future. “This announcement is welcome news for Australian mining regions, where the minerals industry is supporting jobs and regional economies. “Regional Australian communities need more support as the nation rebounds from the Covid-19 pandemic which has hit young Australians and their job prospects hard. In particular, the sector has sustained its backing for apprenticeships. The resources sector currently employs 8 836 apprentices and trainees,” Constable said. She pointed to recent National Centre for Vocational Education Research figures, which show that while apprenticeships across all industries were down 11%, the mining industry only experienced a 1.41% decrease. “The broader Australian minerals industry aims to create more than 5 000 apprenticeships working in partnership with the Australian government through the Mining Skills Organisation Pilot. “The success of Australia’s resources sector – including its ability to meet strong export demand – depends on a highly skilled workforce which is qualified and experienced in a range of scientific and environmental fields, professional occupations and trades.”